

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 1 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  

Struggle for Pakistan 
A Chronological Timeline  

(1857-1947) 
 

MAY 1857 

War of Independence, which the British call “Mutiny”, started 
under the leadership of Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar, the 
last Mughal ruler. 

SEPTEMBER 19-20, 1857 

British forces captured the Red Fort by entering through the Lahore 
Gate which was seized by Brig Jones. Emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar 
escaped to tomb of King Humayun along with his family. 

SEPTEMBER 22, 1857 

Bahadur Shah Zafar was arrested by Captain William Hodson along 
with two queens, three sons, Jawan Bakht, Mirza Mughal, Khizr 
Sultan and grandson Abu Bakr. Two princes were shot dead by 
Captain William Hodson and their severed heads were brought 
before the King. 

JANUARY-MARCH 1858 

Bahadur Shah Zafar was tried by the Military Court. Finally, it was 
decided that the King along with his two wives Zeenat Mahal and 
Taj Mahal and his young son, Jawan Bakht be exiled to Rangoon 
(now Yangon), Myanmar. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 2 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
NOVEMBER 7, 1862 

Bahadur Shah Zafar died in Rangoon (Myanmar) and was buried 
there. 

1867 

Prominent Hindus campaigned to replace the existing court 
language Urdu (Persian script) with Hindi (Devanagari script).  
Reacting to this Sir Syed Ahmed Khan met Mr. Shakespeare, 
Commissioner of Banaras, and said to him: “Now I am convinced 
that these two nations will not work united in any cause. At present, 
there is no open hostility between them. But, on account of the so-
called educated people, it will increase a hundredfold in the future.  
He, who is alive at that time, will see it come to pass.” 

APRIL 29, 1870 

Sir Syed wrote to Nawab Mohsinul Mulk: “This is a proposal which 
will make Hindu-Muslim unity impossible to achieve. Muslims will 
never agree to Hindi and if Hindus, also following the new move, 
insist on Hindi, they will also not agree to Urdu. The result will be 
that the Hindus and Muslims will be completely separated”. 

DECEMBER 26, 1870 

On his return from England, Sir Syed started a Society for the 
Educational Progress of Indian Muslims at Banaras. This Society 
later became the basis on which the Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental 
College at Aligarh was founded. 

MAY 25, 1875 

Opening ceremony of Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College was 
arranged by Sir Syed at Aligarh, but the classes started on June 1, 
1875. This M.A.O. College was later raised to the status of a Muslim 
University in 1921. 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 3 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
JANUARY 12, 1883 

As Member of the Imperial Legislative Council, Sir Syed Ahmad 
Khan, speaking on the Local Self-Government Bill, said: “The 
system of representation by election means the representation of 
the views and interests of the majority of the population, and, in 
countries where the population is composed of one race and one 
creed, it is no doubt the best system that can be adopted. But, my 
Lord, in a country like India, where caste distinctions still flourish, 
where there is no fusion of the various races, where religious 
distinctions are still violent, where education in its modern sense 
has not made an equal or proportionate progress among all the 
sections of the population, I am convinced that the introduction of 
the principle of election, pure and simple, for representation of 
various interests on the local boards and the district councils, would 
be attended with evils of greater significance than purely economic 
considerations. So long as differences of race and creed, and the 
distinctions of caste form an important element in the sociopolitical 
life of India, and influence her inhabitants in matters connected 
with the administration and welfare of the country at large, the 
system of election, pure and simple, cannot be safely adopted. The 
larger community would totally override the interests of the smaller 
community, and the ignorant public would hold Government 
responsible for introducing measures which might make the 
differences of race and creed more violent than ever”.1 

DECEMBER 28, 1885 

Indian National Congress (INC) was founded in December 1885. Sir 
Syed called upon the Muslims not to join this party because it was 
the representative body of Hindus, not of Muslims. As the Muslims 
form a separate nation, they will be required to form their own 

                                                          
1 Fazale Kareem, Sir Syed Ahmed Khan: Reformer and First Protagonist of 
Muslim Nationalism, (Islamabad: National Book Council,2003), 240-256. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 4 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
separate body. At that time there was not a sizeable educated class 
all over British India which could form a separate body of the 
Muslims. Therefore, in a number of speeches he called upon them 
to devote their efforts towards education.2 It was after his death in 
1898 that his associates established a Muslim party. 

1887 

In a forceful speech, Sir Syed said: “When our Hindu brethren… 
wish to make a move which involves a loss to us and humiliation to 
our nation we cannot remain friendly, and undoubtedly it is our 
duty to protect our nation from those attacks of the Hindus… which, 
we are sure, are going to harm our nation.” 

OCTOBER 27, 1888 

Badruddin Tyabji, a Muslim leader from Bombay who had joined 
the INC, wrote a letter to A. O. Hume, Secretary-General of the 
Congress, in which he informed him: “An overwhelming majority of 
Mohammedans is against the movement (Indian National 
Congress). Against this array it is useless saying that the intelligent 
and educated Mohammedans are in favour of the Congress…. I 
observe increasing bitterness between Hindus and Mussalmans”. 
He also explained that well known Muslims such as Sir Syed Ahmed 
Khan, Syed Amir Ali and Abdul Latif were against the Congress. 

1888 

In a speech at Meerut, Sir Syed said: “The proposals of the Congress 
are extremely inexpedient for the country which is inhabited by two 
different nations…. Now, suppose that all the English were to leave 
India…. then who would be the rulers of India? Is it possible that 
under these circumstances two nations – the Mohammedans and 
the Hindus – could sit on the same throne and remain equal in 

                                                          
2 Ibid., 240-256. 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 5 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
power? Most certainly not. It is necessary that one of them should 
conquer the other and thrust it down. To hope that both could 
remain equal is to desire the impossible and the inconceivable.” 

MARCH 27, 1898 

Sir Syed Ahmed Khan passed away. 

OCTOBER 16, 1905 

Partition of Bengal. The British decided to redraw boundaries, 
the provinces of Bengal and Assam were re-constituted to form two 
provinces – Western Bengal, and Eastern Bengal and Assam – 
because of administrative problems as Bengal was too big a 
province for one governor to administer. Incidentally Western 
Bengal became the Hindu majority province, and the Eastern 
Bengal and Assam became a Muslim majority province. The Hindus 
started the Swadeshi Movement against this partition, especially 
against the new province of Eastern Bengal and Assam because it 
became another Muslim majority province. This factor aroused the 
Muslims all over British India and made them conscious enough to 
start their own separate political party which was established in the 
next year. Ultimately, the British Government bowed down before 
the Swadeshi Movement and reunited both provinces by ending the 
partition in 1911. 

OCTOBER 1, 1906 

Simla Deputation. A delegation of 35 prominent Muslim leaders 
from all over the subcontinent headed by Sir Aga Khan III met the 
Viceroy Lord Minto at Simla and presented the Muslim demands 
that the Muslims were a distinct community with additional 
interests of their own, which were not shared by other communities. 
They had hitherto suffered from the fact they had not been 
adequately represented. In reply, Lord Minto assured the Muslims 
that their political rights and interests as a community would be 
safeguarded in the coming electoral representation. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 6 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
DECEMBER 27, 1906 

Jinnah, who was already a member of the INC since 1906, attended 
the 22nd Congress session at Calcutta as a delegate from Bombay 
Province. But the fact remains that despite being member of the 
Congress he advocated the Muslim cause at the Congress sessions. 
At this session, Jinnah pleaded that: i) Muslims should be given 
equal status along with the Hindus in the National Congress; ii) The 
Muslim community should be treated in the same way as the Hindu 
community; and, iii) The Congress should work for the restoration 
of Muslim wakf-alal-aulad (Muslim wakf rights) issue for which a 
resolution was passed. 

DECEMBER 30, 1906 

All India Muslim League (AIML) was founded at Dacca (now 
Dhaka) to protect and advance the political rights and interests of 
the Mussalmans of India, and to respectfully represent their needs 
and aspirations to the Government. This was done by a resolution 
moved by Nawab Salimullah Khan Bahadur of Dacca. By another 
resolution moved by Nabiullah, various provincial committees were 
formed to have this body established in all provinces of the Indian 
Subcontinent. Another resolution moved by Nabiullah, various 
provincial committees to have this body established in all the 
provinces of the Indian Subcontinent. Nawab Salimullah Khan 
Bahadur of Dacca in his address after moving the resolution said 
that the AIML would be the representative voice of all the Muslims 
of British India. Therefore, “formation of a separate organization of 
the Mussalmans is necessary” as it will represent “the views of the 
Mussalmans of India”. 

FEBRUARY 20, 1909 

In a letter to the Times of India (Bombay), Jinnah supported the 
Muslim cause that in the new reforms the Muslims should be given 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 7 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
the right of separate representation based on separate electorates at 
the central and provincial legislative assemblies. 

AUGUST 2, 1909 

Jinnah moved a resolution at a meeting of the Anjuman-i-Islam, 
Bombay by which he demanded from the Government to form 
separate Mussalman electorates in consultation with Mussalman 
leaders. 

JANUARY 4, 1910 

Muslim members of the Bombay Legislative Council elected Jinnah 
by a majority vote as member of the Imperial Legislative Council for 
a term of three years. 

FEBRUARY 1910 

Though not member of the Muslim League, Jinnah attended a 
meeting of the Council of AIML on invitation. 

DECEMBER 31, 1912 

On a special invitation, Jinnah attended the meeting of AIML 
Council at Bankipur which was presided over by Sir Aga Khan. On 
Jinnah’s motion, a resolution was passed by this Council by which 
it was demanded that the goal of AIML should be to get system of 
self-government suitable to India, and not on the colonial model as 
demanded by the INC. 

MARCH 5, 1913 

On a motion by Jinnah, the Imperial Legislative Council passed the 
Mussalaman Wakf Validating Bill after discussion for two years. 
This was the first bill moved by a private member of the Imperial 
Council. This was accomplishment of a great demand of the 
Muslims since the time of Sir Syed Ahmed Khan who had advocated 
this issue before the British Government many times. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 8 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
OCTOBER 10, 1913 

Jinnah formally joined the AIML by signing the proforma of party 
membership on which Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar and Syed 
Wazir Hasan also testified. 

DECEMBER 20, 1913 

Jinnah presided over the meeting of Anjuman-i-Islam, Bombay to 
welcome Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar and Syed Wazir Hasan 
on their return from England where they had gone to plead the 
cause the Cawnpore Mosque issue. 

DECEMBER 26-28, 1913 

At the INC’s session in Karachi, Jinnah got the Congress to agree to 
the Muslim League’s demand for the grant of self-government as 
suitable to India. 

JULY 28, 1914 

First World War started in Europe in which the whole world was 
engulfed. The British, as leader of the Allied Forces, fully 
participated in the War against opposing Central Powers led by 
Germany. The problem for the Indian Muslims was that Ottoman 
Empire sided with the Central Powers. In this way British 
Government saw it as their enemy. As a fear from the Indian 
Muslims, the Indian British Government secretly contacted some 
Muslim leaders so that the annual session of AIML could not be 
held in December 1914. This was on the plea that the holding of 
AIML session would tantamount to as being against the interests of 
the British Government. Jinnah thought that the Indian Muslims 
were being led on the wrong path through some “wire-pullers”. But 
the problem was that at that time Jinnah had not become a member 
of the AIML Council. It was in February 1915 that Jinnah was 
elected as member of the AIML Council. 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 9 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
APRIL 12, 1915 

Jinnah, on becoming member of the AIML Council, contacted a 
number of Muslim leaders. By April 12, 1915 he was able to get 
signatures of twenty-eight Muslim leaders on a requisition for 
holding the AIML session in Bombay. 

APRIL 26, 1915 

Jinnah sent requisition to Syed Wazir Hasan, Secretary of the 
AIML, requesting for the session of the AIML to be held in Bombay. 
This requisition was signed by thirty-three Muslim leaders. 

JUNE 6, 1915 

Meeting of the AIML Council was held in Bombay for the purpose 
of making a decision for holding AIML session in Bombay. A 
decision could not be taken because of opposition of Suleman 
Cassim Haji Mitha and Moulvi Rafiuddin Ahmad, President and 
Vice-President of the Bombay Muslim League. As a result of this, a 
controversy started in the columns of Bombay newspapers in which 
Jinnah group and the Mitha group wrote against each other. 

NOVEMBER 10, 1915 

Meeting of the AIML Council held in Lucknow decided to hold the 
next session of the AIML in Bombay on invitation from the Jinnah 
group of Muslim leaders. Mitha group was defeated and the 
decision of the Council was taken by 49 to 13 votes. Thus, Jinnah 
prevailed over the deliberations of the Muslim League. 

NOVEMBER 11, 1915 

Jinnah published an appeal to the Muslim leaders in the 
newspapers of Bombay in which he called upon all of them to sink 
their differences and close their ranks so that it could be proved that 
“we are fit for the real political franchise, freedom and self-
government”. Concluding his appeal, he said: “In conclusion, I urge 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 10 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
all the Mohammedans to rally round the flag of the All India Muslim 
League and, as true patriots, stand by its constitution and thus 
make the community feel proud of the only political organization it 
possesses at present”. 

DECEMBER 9, 1915 

On the desire of the Mitha group, a delegation of the Bombay 
Muslim League leaders – led by Jinnah – met Lord Willingdon, 
Governor of Bombay at the Governor House in which Sir Ali Imam, 
the Law Member of Viceroy’s Executive Council, Jinnah, Faiz 
Tyabji, Fazalbhoy Currimbhoy, Muhammad Hakim Abdullah Shah, 
Sharif Devji Kanji, Sulleman Abdul Wahid, Suleman Cassim Mitha 
and Rafiuddin participated. All concerns of the Government with 
respect to the holding of AIML session in Bombay were removed. 
The Government also agreed that it would not oppose the holding 
of the session. 

DECEMBER 30-31, 1915 TO JANUARY 1, 1916 

Three-day session of the AIML was held in Bombay presided over 
by Mazharul Haq, a friend of Jinnah.  When there was some 
disturbance on December 31, Jinnah was asked to control the 
session. Jinnah did so and the third day’s proceedings were held at 
Taj Mahal Hotel, Bombay. The successful holding of the session 
proved Jinnah’s dominance over the League’s proceedings. 
Towards the end of session, the President thus thanked Jinnah: 
“Mr. Jinnah, we the Mussalmans of India thank you” – a remark 
acclaimed by “loud” and “continued” cheers by the audience. At this 
session, Jinnah succeeded in appointing a committee of the Muslim 
League members to negotiate with the Congress committee 
members for finalization of a joint scheme of reforms. This 
committee was to negotiate with the committee appointed by the 
Congress – formed as a result of a motion by Banerjea, also a friend 
of Jinnah – for developing joint scheme of reforms on December 
27, 1915. It was Jinnah’s personality which made the Muslims, 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 11 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
Hindus, and Parsis work together and successfully hold the League 
and the Congress sessions at the same time in Bombay. This showed 
Jinnah’s popularity and people’s faith in his ideals. 

NOVEMBER 9, 1916 

Bombay High Court Bench hearing the Tilak Sedition Case accepted 
Tilak’s plea advocated by Jinnah, as the leader of a group of lawyers 
appearing in the High Court on behalf of Tilak, that Tilak’s criticism 
of the “sarkar” should not be taken as criticism of the British Crown 
but of the government or the bureaucracy. What Tilak’s criticism 
meant was for the betterment of the performance of the 
bureaucracy through act of parliament and not otherwise. This 
argument of Jinnah was accepted by Justice Bachelor, head of the 
High Court Bench, who pronounced the judgment and released 
Tilak from all bonds. Though this judgment was disliked by Lord 
Willingdon, Governor of Bombay, the Viceroy did not favor him. 
This was a great victory on the part of Jinnah who, for the first time 
in Indian history, got the right of official existence of the opposition 
in Indian legislature. 

DECEMBER 30-31, 1916 

9th session of AIML was held in Lucknow which was presided over 
by Jinnah as per the decision of the AIML Council. It was at this 
session that a joint scheme of reforms, concurrently prepared by the 
Congress and Muslim League Committees, was approved which 
decided that a “complete self-government in India” should be 
established on the basis of Lucknow Pact which was adopted by the 
Muslim League and the Congress. This joint scheme known as the 
Lucknow Pact approved the scheme of democracy based on 
separate scheme of electorates for the Muslims and other 
minorities. The two parties had already approved this scheme some 
days before their sessions at Lucknow. This was not only the first 
pact which the two greatest political parties agreed on but was also 
a pact between two nations – Hindus and Muslims. This was the 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 12 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
realization of Jinnah’s long-held view that unless the two nations 
were united, the British Government will not hand over power to 
Indians. But this Pact proved a short-lived affair because of 
dominance of M. K. Gandhi in the Congress’ politics in 1920. 
However, Jinnah’s ideals remained to be realized until later when 
in the 1940s Congress and the AIML had to agree again, though not 
as part of the same nation but as two separate nations representing 
the two countries – Hindustan and Pakistan. 

Jinnah had already contacted the British Government that a Joint 
Scheme of Reforms was being settled between AIML and the 
Congress – the two largest political organizations of the country – 
and the Government should be ready to negotiate with the political 
leaders for the grant of self-government suitable to India. For this 
purpose, the British Government formed a Round Table group 
headed by Lionel Curtis, a member of Bombay Governor’s 
Executive Council. Curtis attended these Lucknow Sessions. Sir 
James Meston, the Lieutenant Governor of the United Provinces of 
Agra and Oudh and some other officials were also in attendance in 
these sessions. 

JANUARY 26, 1917 

Jinnah arranged a meeting of 70 politicians with the Round Table 
official group headed by Lionel Curtis in Bombay which lasted for 
about two hours for the purpose of evolution of new reforms for the 
grant of self-government suitable to India. The matter could not be 
settled. When the British Government had introduced the idea of 
self-government on the colonial model in 1905, it was given that 
when a sizeable educated class – no less than 10% – in India would 
come into being, the British Government would grant self-
government to the Indians. 

 

 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 13 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
APRIL 1917 

In a number of public addresses and at the Imperial Legislative 
Assembly speeches Jinnah demanded that since the educated 
Indians had grown at 12% of its population, therefore they deserved 
to be granted self-government as already promised by the British 
Government. 

AUGUST 20, 1917 

British Government made a policy announcement that it is not 
responsible for the educated class of Indians, but for the people of 
India. It also clearly announced that until the people were not 
capable enough to attain independence, the British would continue 
to rule the country. In this way the entire politics of India changed 
and new developments took place which led to the rise of Mahatma 
Gandhi in the Congress’ politics. Jinnah termed this announcement 
of the British Government in line with the British “imperial” policy. 

APRIL 19, 1918 

Jinnah’s marriage with Rattanbai took place in Bombay. Before 
being married to Jinnah, she embraced Islam and her marriage 
rites were performed according to the Islamic rites. 

DECEMBER 10, 1918 

Lord Willingdon, the retiring Governor of Bombay, was to be given 
a farewell address and a proposal was presented for a memorial to 
Lord Willingdon for successfully working as the Governor. This 
effort of the Government and their supporters was foiled by a 
demonstration in which more than three thousand people 
participated under Jinnah’s leadership. As a result of this public 
demonstration headed by Jinnah this memorial meeting was 
thwarted and made a failure. This was a great victory for Jinnah 
who was later honored by way of a memorial hall named Jinnah’s 
People’s Memorial Hall. It was constructed by using public funds 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 14 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
that were collected to raise a statue of Jinnah in the Bombay Town 
Hall and still stands today as a memorial to Jinnah. 

MARCH 28, 1919 

As a protest against the passage of Indian Criminal Law 
(Amendment) Bill (popularly known as the Rowlatt Act), which had 
recently been passed by the Imperial Legislative Council, Jinnah 
resigned from the membership of Imperial Legislative Council. In a 
letter he addressed to the Viceroy, Jinnah made it clear that “the 
passing of the Rowlatt Bill by the Government of India, and the 
assent given to it by Your Excellency as Governor-General against 
the will of the people has severely shaken the trust reposed by them 
in British justice”. Jinnah further wrote: “The fundamental 
principles of justice have been uprooted and the constitutional 
rights of the people have been violated at a time when there is no 
real danger to the state by an over fretful and incompetent 
bureaucracy which is neither responsible to the people nor in touch 
with real public opinion.” 

APRIL 13, 1919 

Following Jinnah’s resignation, there started a demonstration 
against the Government. It was declared that April 13, 1919 will be 
observed as a protest day all over India. It was on this day that 
Jallianwala Tragedy (also known as Jallianwala Bagh massacre) 
in Amritsar occurred in which more than four hundred people were 
killed by British Indian forces led by Brigadier-General Reginald 
Dyer. Mr. and Mrs. Jinnah were to address such a protest gathering 
in Bombay but the Government suppressed holding of this protest 
rally in Bombay. They then proceeded to Hyderabad (Deccan) and 
addressed a protest meeting there. 

APRIL 26, 1919 

The possibility of arresting Jinnah was discussed for some months 
but on April 26, 1919 a decision was taken to ban Jinnah’s 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 15 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
newspaper Bombay Chronicle and its editor Benjamin G. 
Horniman, a British journalist, was deported to England. Thus 
Jinnah was deprived of his newspaper for stirring the Indian people 
against the British Government. As a matter of fact, the 
Government avoided arresting Jinnah because of his “pragmatic” 
and popular ideas which, if he was arrested, would gain support of 
the people. The Government worked so as to control the publicity 
of his ideas. It was in this background that Gandhi was secretly 
encouraged to come at the forefront of politics and check the 
popularity of Jinnah. The Hindu mind was already ready for it 
because they also feared the dominance of Jinnah as a Muslim 
leader in the Congress, which was considered against the interest of 
the Hindu Raj. 

AUGUST 27, 1919 

Jinnah, being the leader of the Muslim delegation, along with his 
delegation met Edwin Montagu, Secretary of State for India, in 
London and presented the Muslim viewpoint regarding Ottoman 
Turkey and preservation of Holy Places of Islam in Arabia. 

DECEMBER 23, 1919 

Government of India Act 1919, incorporating the Montagu-
Chelmsford Reforms, was approved by the Crown after the Bill was 
passed by the British Parliament. For the purpose of presenting his 
viewpoint regarding these reforms, Jinnah visited London and 
presented his viewpoint before Edwin Montagu, Secretary of State 
for India, in the Joint Parliamentary Meeting and other forums. 

DECEMBER 30, 1919 

The sessions of AIML and INC were simultaneously held at 
Amritsar as sympathy for the martyrs of Jallianwala Bagh. This 
was all done in accordance with Jinnah’s planning. The most 
important issue in these sessions was whether to accept the 
Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms 1919 or reject them. In these 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 16 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
sessions two groups emerged: 1) Tilak-Das group who wanted to 
reject the new reforms; 2) Jinnah-Gandhi group who wanted to 
accept these reforms with some amendments. Ultimately Jinnah-
Gandhi group prevailed over the deliberations of the AIML and 
Congress, and respective resolutions were passed with the support 
of the majority. The AIML session, which was presided over by 
Hakim Ajmal Khan, passed another resolution with the support and 
amendment of Jinnah which made it clear that in the future in India 
further efforts would be made “to protect and advance the political, 
religious, and other rights and interests of Indian Mussalmans”. In 
the original resolution, the word ‘religious’ was not included. It was 
because of Jinnah’s suggestion that the word was also included. 

DECEMBER 28, 1920 

Jinnah attended the Nagpur Congress session. In this session, 
Gandhi introduced his resolution to intensify the Non-Cooperation 
or Satyagraha Movement by which elections under the new 
reforms were to be boycotted. Schools, educational institutions and 
foreign goods were also to be boycotted. The lawyers were also 
required to boycott the courts all over the country. This was against 
the stance of Jinnah for which Gandhi promised to work the new 
reforms in the Amritsar Session of the Congress on December 26, 
1919. Jinnah tried his best to appeal to the participants but his sane 
call was not heard because Gandhi had aroused the religious 
sentiments of both the Hindu and Muslim youths and leaders. The 
Muslims were stirred over the Khilafat issue and danger to the holy 
places of Islam in Arabia. In this matter, Gandhi got the support of 
Jamiat Ulama-i-Hind and the Central Khilafat Committee by 
ignoring Jinnah and his AIML. The Hindu youth were also secretly 
stirred that the rise of Jinnah in the Congress and AIML alike was 
considered against the interests of the Hindu Raj. This was 
prepared under the secret role of the Hindu youth headed by 
Jawaharlal Nehru. After the Congress Amritsar session, Gandhi had 
gradually changed and got the support of Home Rule League, 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 17 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
Jamiat Ulama-i-Hind, and Central Khilafat Committee before 
capturing over the Congress politics at the Nagpur sessions. Jinnah 
thought this a dangerous scenario for the future of the Muslims, 
which a number of Muslim leaders including the Ali brothers were 
to realize later. Therefore, Jinnah left the Congress and devoted all 
of his political activities to the Muslims led by AIML. Jinnah 
developed the belief that Gandhi had deceived him by turning 
against the promises he had made to him in December 1919 at the 
Congress Amritsar session. 

1922 

During this year in February, Gandhi called off the Non-
Cooperation Movement when he saw this issue had divided the 
Indian people. It was not only that the Muslims became divided, but 
the Hindus as well. All this was witnessed at Congress Gaya session 
held on December 26, 1922. For all this there was none but Gandhi 
who was responsible. The AIML session in December was also not 
held. Jinnah, as President of the AIML, took the responsibility of 
keeping the Muslim people united around one political party. 

MARCH 31-APRIL 1, 1923 

It was because of efforts of Jinnah that the annual session of the 
AIML was held at Lucknow. G. M. Bhurgri, a close associate of 
Jinnah, presided over this session. This session was prorogued 
because of some divergent views amongst the League leaders for the 
revival of AIML. 

AUGUST 1923 

Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar, who was arrested in the Khilafat 
Movement agitation in 1921, was released from jail. This was 
because on July 1923 the Lausanne Treaty was concluded by which 
Istanbul was vacated by the British forces “removing the major 
Muslim complaint against the British”. In this way “the Khilafat 
movement had lost much of its momentum” because Gandhi had 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 18 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
separated himself from the Khilafat Movement. This had 
disappointed Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar. 

SEPTEMBER 4-8, 1923 

Special Congress session was held in Delhi in which Maulana 
Mohammad Ali Jauhar participated. Maulana Jauhar sided with C. 
R. Das’ Council-entry programme, instead of Gandhi’s path which 
was against the proposal. Gandhi considered the Council-entry 
programme actually mooted by Jinnah, who had already left the 
Congress. 

NOVEMBER 14, 1923 

Jinnah was elected unopposed as member of Indian Legislative 
Assembly from the Bombay constituency. 

MAY 24-25, 1924 

The prorogued AIML session was held in Lahore presided over by 
Jinnah in which Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar also participated. 
A number of AIML leaders appreciated Jinnah’s efforts for the 
revival of Muslim League because of the reason that “under the 
present circumstances” it was “most essential to voice our 
grievances and to safeguard and advance our rights and privileges 
in India”. In this way majority of the Muslim leaders had become 
favorable to Jinnah’s concern for revival of AIML and his thinking 
that for the future of the Muslims of British India, the revival of the 
League was of utmost importance. Some days before the holding of 
this session of the AIML at Lahore, Jinnah gave an interview to the 
press in which he explained that there was great danger to the 
existence of Muslims in the Indo-Pak subcontinent because of the 
rise of Shuddhi and the Sangathan movements who have made a 
point of playing music near the Muslim mosques. Under these 
circumstances, there was no other organization other than the 
AIML that could save the future of the Muslims in the subcontinent. 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 19 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
NOVEMBER-DECEMBER, 1924 

In June 1924 the Government of India appointed the Reforms 
Enquiry Committee (also known as the Muddiman committee) 
headed by A. P. Muddiman, of which Jinnah was also appointed a 
member. For some months this Committee interviewed a number 
of people and conducted its proceedings, finalizing its report in 
November 1924. There occurred a split in the proceedings of this 
Committee. The majority members wrote a separate report i.e., the 
Majority Report while Jinnah along with three other members (Dr. 
Tej Bahadur Sapru, P. S. Sivaswamy Aiyer, and R. P. Paranjpye) 
wrote a Minority Report which disagreed with the Majority Report. 
Both these reports were submitted on December 3, 1924.  In the 
Minority Report, it was on insistence from Jinnah that the AIML 
Resolution was included which demanded that: 1) Separate 
electorates should be continued and included in the new reforms; 
2) Federal constitution should be proposed by which autonomy of 
the provinces should be maintained; 3) Integrity of the Muslim 
majority provinces must be maintained in the new constitution; and 
4) On any communal issue, the majority will not impose its will on 
the minority community unless and until ¾ of the members of the 
concerned community agree to it. 

DECEMBER 30-31, 1924 

16th session of AIML was held in Bombay and presided over by 
Jinnah. In this session majority of the Muslim leaders from all over 
India participated and agreed for the revival of AIML, including 
Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar, who erstwhile had not agreed. 
Now, he not only agreed to the revival of AIML but “garlanded Mr. 
Jinnah at the conclusion of proceedings and embraced him and 
kissed him on both cheeks amidst loud outburst of applause from 
the audience”. In his speech Jinnah made it clear that it was the 
“practical situation” in the political sense which made him struggle 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 20 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
for the revival of the party, a decision which was essential for the 
future survival of Muslims as a whole in the Indo-Pak subcontinent. 

MARCH 1925  

Under the pressure from Congress and Swarajya parties, the 
Government was not ready to accept the Minority Report. In a press 
conference on March 1925, Jinnah made it clear that unless the new 
constitution was not framed in the light of the Minority Report, the 
Muslims would not accept the new constitution. The Government 
considered it a threat from Jinnah and delayed the constitutional 
proposals in fear of Jinnah who was still very popular and effective 
in the Indian politics. 

JUNE 1925 

The Government of India appointed the Indian Sandhurst 
Committee (also known as the Skeen Committee) headed by 
Lieutenant General Sir Andrew Skeen, Chief of the General Staff 
and with a number of members of the Central Legislative Assembly 
including Jinnah. The purpose of this Committee was to probe into 
the possibility of how the Indian applicants could be granted 
commission in the Indian Army and whether it was desirable and 
practicable to establish a military college in India to train Indians 
for the commissioned ranks of the Indian Army and, if a military 
college was established in India, it should supersede or be 
supplemented by Sandhurst and Woolwich so far as the training of 
Indians for the commissioned ranks of the Indian Army is 
concerned. Jinnah had been speaking for this cause in the Central 
Assembly since the World War I. All the elected members of the 
Central Assembly became favorable to Jinnah’s concept of grant of 
commission to the Indians in the Army so that Indians could take 
up the defence of India. 

 

 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 21 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
AUGUST 1925-APRIL 1926 

The Indian Sandhurst Committee visited various prominent 
educational institutions all over British India and interviewed 
various personalities all over the country. Jinnah put forth probing 
questions which directed people to answer in favor of grant of 
commission to the Indians in the Army. The Committee also 
appointed a three-member Sub-committee headed by Jinnah. Two 
other members were: Sir Phiroze Sethna and Zorawar Singh, who 
were also members of the Indian Central Legislative Assembly. This 
Sub-committee was given the task of visiting the military 
institutions of UK, France, U.S. and Canada. 

MAY-AUGUST 1926 

The Indian Sandhurst Sub-committee headed by Jinnah visited the 
military institutions of UK, France, U.S. and Canada and finalized 
their report on August 9, 1926. This Sub-committee report was 
written by Jinnah himself which the other members endorsed. 
Wherever the Sub-Committee went, Jinnah was vocal enough to 
enquire into the pinching matters which the British rulers were not 
happy to note and were rather perturbed.  

AUGUST 13, 1926 

On his arrival in Bombay, Jinnah issued a press statement in which 
he said: “We saw various institutions in France, England, Canada 
and America. The system, no doubt, was different in each country. 
You cannot take any single system en bloc and apply it to India 
having regard to the circumstances of this country. Therefore, you 
will have to consider what particular elements in each system would 
suit Indian conditions and probably it will ultimately be a combined 
system in its main features. Whatever system India may adopt 
ultimately its success will greatly depend upon enlisting the 
cooperation of the educational authorities in India”. 

 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 22 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
NOVEMBER 1926 

Jinnah was elected member of the Indian Central Legislative 
Assembly. In this election there were two other contestants against 
Jinnah. On the election day, seeing the poor return of voters from 
Bombay, the two other candidates announced their withdrawal 
from the contest. Jinnah won with overwhelming majority. His 
opponents were: Hassenbhai A. Lalji supported by Swarajya Party 
and Salehbhoy K. Barodawala, Sheriff of Bombay as an 
independent. Jinnah secured 2700 votes against 700 secured by his 
opponents. 

APRIL 26, 1927 

Jinnah addressed a public meeting in Bombay arranged by Servants 
of India Society in which he lamented that the Indian Sandhurst 
Committee Report has not been published and clarified: “So long as 
India was unable to defend herself, no Swaraj would come to her 
either from outside or from within”. Despite such complaints on the 
part of Jinnah and other members of Indian Central Legislative 
Assembly, the British Government avoided implementation of the 
Indian Sandhurst Committee Report. It was in 1932 that the Indian 
Military Academy was established in India. 

AUGUST 10,1928 

The All Parties Congress Committee popularly known as the Nehru 
Committee published its report. The Committee was chaired by 
Motilal Nehru with his son Jawaharlal Nehru as the Secretary. This 
Committee rejected the separate electorate for Muslims and other 
smaller communities. All the Muslim demands made by Jinnah 
under the Delhi Muslim Proposals of March 1927 were ignored. The 
tone of Hindu Raj was visible in the language and tenor of the 
Report. This opened the eyes of different sections of the Muslims, 
especially those living in the Muslim majority provinces. All 
sections of Muslim population felt threatened by the Nehru Report. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 23 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
Majority of the Muslim leaders belonging to different parties felt 
alarmed by the tone of the Nehru Report regarding Muslims. The 
Muslim India as a whole rose in revolt against this Report. 

MARCH 28, 1929 

Jinnah presented his famous Fourteen Points before the AIML 
Council in which he made it clear that: 1) Muslim representation in 
the Central Legislative cannot be less than one-third and that was 
to be based on separate electorates; 2) Muslim majority provinces 
– Bengal, NWFP, Punjab and Balochistan – will not be disturbed at 
any cost; 3) Sindh should be separated from Bombay; 4)  
Constitutional guarantees are required for the adequate safeguards 
of the protection and promotion of Muslim education, language, 
religion, personal laws, and Muslim charitable institutions; 5) Full 
religious liberty, i.e., liberty of belief, worship and observance, 
propaganda, association and education shall be guaranteed to all 
communities. 

JUNE 19, 1929 

Jinnah wrote a letter to the newly elected British Prime Minister 
Ramsay MacDonald pleading that the Simon Commission’s report, 
due to be submitted to the British Government, should not be taken 
as a true reflection of the Indian opinion. Therefore, Jinnah 
suggested to the Prime Minister that the Indian politicians of 
different sections should be invited to discuss with them the final 
draft of the constitutional bill reflecting the true Indian opinion 
covering different sections of the Indian society. 

OCTOBER 31, 1929 

On the direction of British Prime Minister, the Viceroy of India Lord 
Irwin announced the holding of Round Table Conference (RTC) in 
London in the next year for final settlement of Indian constitutional 
issues. 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 24 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
DECEMBER 30-31, 1929 

Indian National Congress approved the starting of Civil 
Disobedience Movement (CDM) by which the British Indian 
Government was to be forced to hand over power to them ignoring 
the Muslims and other communities. This made the Muslim leaders 
of all sections further alert of the Congress’ designs. 

JANUARY 31, 1930 

In a meeting with a group of Hindu leaders led by Dr. Tej Bahadur 
Sapru, Jinnah made it clear that from now on the AIML will not 
compromise with the Congress and other parties with nothing short 
of the Fourteen Points already presented by him. Jinnah also 
termed the Nehru Report signaling the parting of ways. 

FEBRUARY 3, 1930 

AIML Council was held under the chairmanship of Jinnah which 
called upon the British Indian Government not to be cowed down 
by the Congress’ threat or that of its Civil Disobedience Movement. 
It further called upon the Government to hold the RTC (Round 
Table Conference) as early as possible. 

FEBRUARY 28, 1930 

Jinnah’s efforts for uniting the two factions of the AIML – Jinnah 
group and Shafi group – culminated and AIML Council meeting 
was held in Delhi presided over by Jinnah. Shafi also participated. 
Over fifty Muslim leaders from different parts of the country 
participated in this meeting. Finally, it was announced that the two 
groups of AIML were united under Jinnah’s leadership and 
Jinnah’s Fourteen Points would now be the goal of AIML. 

APRIL 22, 1930 

Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar addressed a public meeting in 
Bombay in which most of the Muslim leaders belonging to all 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 25 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
segments of Muslims participated. In his address Maulana Jauhar 
denounced Gandhi’s Civil Disobedience Movement because he 
believed that Gandhi’s real objective was “to establish Hindu Raj”.  

MAY 1930 

The Viceroy of India announced the schedule of Round Table 
Conference to be held in London in October 1930 to which various 
segments of leaders were to be invited, including Jinnah. 

SEPTEMBER 8, 1930 

In a press interview published in the newspapers, Jinnah warned 
the Congress leaders that they are committing a “grave mistake” by 
launching the Civil Disobedience Movement and that they have 
“failed” to understand the “present condition of India”.3  

OCTOBER 2, 1930 

On the eve of his departure to London from Karachi, Jinnah made 
it clear that there were four principal parties in India: 1) British 
Government, 2) Indian States, 3) Hindus, and 4) Muslims. He made 
it clear that unless these four principal parties do not agree on a 
unanimous programme the RTC is bound to fail. 

OCTOBER 1930 

Jinnah was elected Member of Indian Central Legislative Assembly 
unopposed in the first week of October. 

OCTOBER 25, 1930 

A meeting of all the members of Central and Provincial Legislatures 
was held in Lucknow which was presided over by Raja of Salempur, 
leading taluqdar of Oudh. Jinnah could not participate in this 
meeting because he had already left for London to participate in the 
RTC. However, all the leaders unanimously agreed that a united 

                                                          
3 Times of India, September 8, 1930. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 26 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
policy on the lines suggested by Jinnah’s Fourteen Points will be 
pursued at the RTC in London. 

DECEMBER 29, 1930 

As planned by the AIML Council presided over by Jinnah, Allama 
Iqbal delivered his presidential address at the Allahabad Session of 
the AIML in which Iqbal demanded: “I would like to see the Punjab, 
the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), Sindh and Balochistan 
amalgamated into a single state. Self-government within the British 
Empire, or without the British Empire, the formation of a 
consolidated North-West Indian Muslim state appears to me to be 
the final destiny of the Muslims, at least of the North-West India”.4 

Towards the end of his address Iqbal also said: “We have a duty 
towards India where we are destined to live and die. We have a duty 
towards Asia, especially Muslim Asia. And since seventy million 
Muslims in a single country constitute a far more valuable asset to 
Islam than all the countries of Muslim Asia put together, we must 
look at the Indian problem, not only from the Muslim point of view, 
but also from the standpoint of the Indian Muslim as such. Our duty 
towards Asia and India cannot be loyally performed without an 
organized will fixed on a definite purpose… And an independent 
line of political action, in such a crisis, is possible only to a 
determined people, possessing a will focalized by a single purpose”.5 

NOVEMBER 12, 1930-JANUARY 19, 1931 

The First Round Table Conference was held in London opened by 
King George V. Jinnah and other political leaders of British India 
participated. The Plenary Session was presided over by Ramsay 
MacDonald, the British Prime Minister. Important Indian leaders 

                                                          
4 Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, Foundations of Pakistan: 1906-1947, Vol. II, 
(Islamabad: NIHCR, 2007), 135-136 
5 Ibid., 147. 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 27 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
including Jinnah also addressed the Plenary Session. Thereafter the 
delegates were split into various committees and sub-committees. 
Jinnah was member of a number of such committees such as the 
Federal Structure Sub-committee, Minorities Sub-Committee, 
Defence Sub-committee, and the Sub-Committee on the Separation 
of Sindh from Bombay Presidency. The reports of these committees 
were to go to the committee of the whole conference of which 
Jinnah was also a member. Jinnah spoke for the rights of Muslims 
and for the separation of Sindh from the Bombay Presidency. 

FEBRUARY 4, 1931 

Jinnah gave interview to Reuters in London in which he announced 
his decision that he has decided to remain in England “indefinitely” 
so that he could “fight India’s battle in England” for the future of 
the Muslims. For this reason he had even decided to contest the 
coming elections for the Parliament from London.6  

MARCH 30, 1931  

Sir Shah Nawaz Bhutto, M. A. Khuhro, Mir Mohamed Allabux, Mir 
Mohamed Baloch, Haji Abdullah Hassan and 20 other leaders from 
Sindh and Balochistan issued a joint press statement in London by 
which they urged upon the British Government to accept Jinnah’s 
Fourteen Points.7 

APRIL 5-6, 1931 

All India Muslim Conference was held in Delhi to which Gandhi was 
also invited. At this conference, Maulana Shaukat Ali urged Gandhi 
to accept Jinnah’s Fourteen Points. When Gandhi opposed this 
idea, Maulana Shaukat Ali warned Gandhi to “leave Muslims 
alone”.8 

                                                          
6 Times of India, February 6, 1931. 
7 Times of India, April 1, 1931. 
8 Times of India, April 6-7, 1931 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 28 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
JULY 31, 1931 

Jinnah came to Bombay on a short visit. In his interview to the 
Times of India, he announced that he had come to India to resign 
from his membership of the Indian Central Legislative Assembly so 
that during his absence the electorate could elect a new member in 
his place. In this interview he also made it clear that there was major 
disagreement between the Hindu and Muslim leaders in the RTC 
and that unless the disagreement between the two nations – Hindus 
and Muslims – was resolved, there would be no constitutional 
agreement amongst the Indians.9 

SEPTEMBER 4, 1931 

On the eve of his departure Jinnah was given a big farewell by the 
Muslim Students Union in Bombay. During his speech, Jinnah 
made it clear: “What is a State? Does it mean that the seventy 
million Muslims should be tied hand and foot in a constitution 
where a particular class of Hindu can possibly tyrannize over and 
deal with them as they like? Is that representative government? Is 
that democratic government?  Certainly not?”10 

SEPTEMBER 5, 1931 

On Rampur Ship, Jinnah, Allama Iqbal, Shafi Dawoodi, Secretary 
of All Parties Muslim Conference and other leaders sailed for 
England to participate in the London Round Table Conferences. 

SEPTEMBER 7-DECEMBER 1, 1931 

Second Round Table Conference was held in London. Jinnah and 
other political leaders including Allama Mohammad Iqbal 
participated. Mahatma Gandhi also participated in this conference. 
During the 2nd RTC, the Muslim delegation jointly framed their 

                                                          
9 Times of India, August 1, 1931.  
10 Times of India, September 5, 1931. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 29 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
strategy and elected Jinnah as their leader. In his speech at the 
Federal Structure Committee which was presided over by the 
British Prime Minister, Jinnah made it clear that “until and unless 
the Muslim demands and the safeguards are incorporated in the 
constitution it will not be acceptable to us [Muslims]”. Sir 
Muhammad Shafi, who followed Jinnah to express his view, 
supported Jinnah’s stance, saying: “Muslim interests of the eighty 
millions of His Majesty’s subjects must be safeguarded, those 
safeguards must be included in the constitution”. Dr. Ambedkar 
who was the leader of 50 million untouchables of British India also 
supported the Muslim demands. Gandhi, disliked this behavior of 
Dr. Ambedkar. He tried to create division between Jinnah and 
Ambedkar but failed. Jinnah’s Fourteen Points had already been 
presented to Lord Sankey, Chairman of this Committee, by Jinnah 
himself. In the meeting of this Committee on November 26, 1931 
Jinnah made it clear that no constitution “will work for 24 hours” 
in India if it fails to meet the Muslim demands.11 Jinnah’s bold 
stance at the RTC was “disliked” by the British Government but, as 
a matter of fact, continued to cause fear in the government circles.12 

SEPTEMBER 1931 

Jinnah purchased his West Heath House in Hampstead, London. 
Built in the style of 1880’s, the three-storied villa had many rooms 
and gables, a lodge, a drive, and eight acres of garden and pasture. 

OCTOBER 29, 1931 

All the Muslim delegates to the RTC met in London and decided to 
authorize Jinnah, Sir Aga Khan, Sir Muhammad Shafi, Maulana 
Shaukat Ali and Ghuznavi to evolve a common formula for the 
security and protection of the interests of the minorities, including 
                                                          
11 Indian Round Table Conference, 12th November 1930-19th January 1931: 
Proceedings of Sub-Committee, Vol. I, (London: HMSO, 1931), 276-333. 
12 Hoare to Willingdon, 5 April 1934, Templewood Papers, MSS. Eur. E. 
240/4, British Library, OIOC, London. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 30 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
the Muslims, in consultation with Sir Herbert Carr, Col Gidney, Dr. 
Ambedkar – a leader of the untouchables – and Pannir Selvan.13 

NOVEMBER 7, 1931 

An agreement was finally reached in London amongst the leaders 
of the Muslims and other minorities in India by which separate 
electorates for Muslims and other minorities was considered sine 
qua non.14 This perturbed Gandhi and the Congress. In its meeting 
held on November 8, 1931 the INC Working Committee condemned 
this unity amongst the minorities and requested Gandhi, who was 
in London at that time for the purpose of participation in the 2nd 
RTC, to come back to India.15 

DECEMBER 31, 1931 

A public meeting at Madras was presided over by Maulana Yakub 
Hassan, member of Indian Legislative Assembly and former Deputy 
Speaker of the Central Legislative Assembly. In his presidential 
address, Maulana Yakub Hassan, referring to Iqbal’s recent 
Allahabad Muslim League Session, explained, “Iqbal’s utterances 
had given new complexion to the legitimate and rational demands 
of Muslims as contained in Mr. Jinnah’s Fourteen Points”.16 

NOVEMBER 17-DECEMBER 24, 1932 

Third Round Table Conference was held in London. Allama Iqbal 
and other politicians from British India participated. It ended 
without coming to any conclusion or agreement. Jinnah, however, 
was not invited to this conference. 

 

                                                          
13 Times of India, October 31, 1931. 
14 Times of India, November 9, 1931. 
15 Ibid. 
16 Times of India, January 2, 1932. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 31 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
JANUARY 3, 1932 

On a request from Jinnah, Nawab Ismail Khan and Maulana Shah 
Masood Ahmad, President and Secretary All India Muslim 
Conference respectively, in a statement issued from London 
resigned from their offices and announced the merger of All India 
Muslim Conference in the AIML.17 This was done for uniting the 
Muslims under the aegis of AIML.18 

JUNE 1932 

The Congress’ Civil Disobedience Movement, initiated for the 
purpose of pressuring the British Government to hand over power 
to the Congress leaders, continued all over British India. The 
Muslim leaders of all the provinces were against this. Other 
minorities were also alarmed by Congress’ Movement. Statements 
were being issued against each other. In this background Dr. 
Moonje, a Congress leader, remarked that Jinnah and Sir Aga Khan 
were in London as if they were Ambassadors-at-large of the 
Muslims at St. James Court.  In this way the Congress leaders were 
doing their utmost to suppress the Muslims’ identity as a nation or 
as a community.19 

AUGUST 16, 1932 

As there was unity amongst all the leaders of the minorities 
including the Muslims. Ramsay MacDonald, the Prime Minister, in 
a statement announced on behalf of the British Government that 
His Majesty’s Government proposed to grant separate electorates 
to the Muslims, Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and 
Europeans living in British India in the central and provincial 
legislatures. In this statement the Muslim demand for creation of 
Sindh as a separate Muslim province was also accepted. It was also 

                                                          
17 Times of India, January 5, 1932. 
18 Times of India, January 6, 1932. 
19 Times of India, June 6, 1932. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 32 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
made clear that the Muslim majorities in Bengal and Punjab will 
not be disturbed.20 This is known as the Communal Award. This 
was done to pacify Jinnah and other Muslim leaders who had 
become united at the RTC. 

OCTOBER 23, 1932 

In a statement issued from London, Jinnah made it clear to both 
the Congress leaders and the British Government that unless there 
was a settlement between the Muslim and Hindu nations, no 
constitution in India could work in the coming future.21 

JANUARY 1933 

Choudhary Rahmat Ali, a student at Cambridge, issued a pamphlet 
titled “Now or Never” in which he coined the word “Pakistan”, 
which means ‘P’ derived from the Punjab, ‘A’ from Afghan (North-
West Frontier Province now called Khyber Pakhtunkhwa), ‘K’ from 
Kashmir, ‘S’ from Sindh, and ‘tan’ from Balochistan. This scheme 
was also brought to the notice of Joint Parliamentary Committee 
which was framing the new constitutional reforms for India. 

MARCH 5, 1933 

A meeting of the Executive Board of All India Muslim Conference 
presided over by Allama Iqbal decided to merge the All India 
Muslim Conference with the AIML. 

MARCH 12, 1933 

A meeting of the AIML Council presided over by Abdul Aziz was 
held in Lahore. About 20 Muslim leaders including Sir Mohammad 
Iqbal, Sir Mohammad Yakub, Maulvi Shah Dawoodi, M. Yamin 
Khan, Captain Sher Mohammad Khan, Khan Sahib Haji Rashid 
Ahmad, and Khan Sahib S. M. Abdullah participated. It was 

                                                          
20 Times of India, August 17, 1932. 
21 Times of India, October 24, 1932. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 33 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
“unanimously resolved to invite Mr. Jinnah to give a lead to the 
Mussalmans of India in the present political situation and with that 
end in view to hold the annual session of the League on April 29 and 
30, 1933 or such other date as would suit the convenience of Mr. 
Jinnah”.22 

MARCH 17, 1933 

The White Paper was issued by the British Government from 
London in which the Communal Award was given parliamentary 
cover. It was on this basis that a Joint Parliamentary Committee by 
the British Parliament was formed to frame the new constitution of 
India which later took the shape of Government of India Act 1935.23 

MAY 12, 1933 

Abdul Aziz, President of AIML, issued a press statement in which 
he disclosed that he had received a requisition signed by more than 
100 Muslim leaders belonging to all the provinces of India – UP, 
Punjab, Bombay, Sindh, Madras, Bengal, Assam, CP and Berar, 
Madras, Delhi, NWFP, Bihar and Orissa – dated April 12, 1933 in 
which it had been requested to disband All India Muslim 
Conference and the AIML “being the old premier political 
organization of the Indian Mussalmans”, to be made the 
“Parliament of Indian Muslims”. This requisition also made it clear 
that “the presence of a personality like Mr. Jinnah is essential to 
lead, guide and unite the community in the present chaotic state of 
Muslim politics”.24 

DECEMBER 7, 1933 

Sir Allama Mohammad Iqbal’s press statement was published in the 
newspapers in which he urged upon Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru 

                                                          
22 Times of India, May 13, 1933. 
23 Times of India, March 18, 1933. 
24 Times of India, May 13, 1933. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 34 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
that “Either Indian majority community will have to accept for itself 
the permanent position of an agent of British imperialism of the 
East or the country will have to be redistributed on the basis of 
religious, historical and cultural affinities so as to do away with the 
question of electorates and the communal problem in its present 
form”.25 

JANUARY 4, 1934 

Jinnah arrived in Bombay on a short visit to India. On his arrival he 
was given a rousing reception. 

FEBRUARY 24, 1934 

Debate on the “Constitutional Reforms and India” was held in 
Bombay which Jinnah attended as the chief guest. In his speech, 
Jinnah criticized certain aspects of the White Paper, especially the 
diarchy. Jinnah explained that the White Paper had not proposed a 
“genuine” federation.26 He, however, made it clear that he accepts 
the Communal Award for the present. 

APRIL 1-2, 1934 

Jinnah came on a short visit to India and presided over AIML 
Council meeting held in Delhi in which the Communal Award was 
accepted. Some speakers at this meeting expressed a strong feeling 
that Mr. Jinnah should stay in the country at this critical hour. Mr. 
Jinnah replied that he could come back to the country at any time, 
by air when he needed, and that he would be promoting the 
interests of the country in England.”27 It was at this meeting that 
both groups of the Muslim League became united making Jinnah 
their President. Jinnah was happy to note that the AIML had 
become united after a long time. In an interview Jinnah also said: 

                                                          
25 Times of India, December 7, 1933. 
26 Times of India, February 26, 1934. 
27 Times of India, April 2, 1934. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 35 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
“I was immensely impressed with most of the speeches made there 
by the various leaders, who had come from different provinces in 
India”. Thus, he was also happy to note that the AIML had become 
a “perfectly sound and healthy” organization.28 

MAY 24, 1934 

Jinnah departed for England from Bombay with the happy 
memories that Muslim India had become united. 

OCTOBER 1934 

Jinnah was re-elected unopposed as Member of the Indian Central 
Legislative Assembly from his Bombay constituency despite being 
in London. 

DECEMBER 14, 1934 

Jinnah departed for India from London by ship, Venice. 

JANUARY 3, 1935 

Jinnah reached Bombay by ship. 

JANUARY 16, 1935 

A meeting of the Punjab Muslim League Council was held at the 
house of Allama Iqbal in Lahore. Allama Iqbal presided over this 
meeting as President of the Punjab Muslim League. In this meeting 
Congress’ attitude towards the Muslims was strongly condemned. 
The meeting also urged upon Jinnah as President of the AIML to 
focus on Muslim interests with full force. 

JANUARY 24, 1935 

Jinnah maneuvered amongst the Members of the Indian Central 
Legislative Assembly and managed to get his friend Sir Abdul 

                                                          
28 Times of India, April 3, 1934. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 36 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
Rahim elected as President of the Assembly by 70 votes to 62. The 
opponent, a Congress candidate, T. A. K. Sherwani was defeated. 

FEBRUARY 7, 1935 

Jinnah’s called for a resolution asking for acceptance of the 
Communal Award and partial adoption of the provincial portion of 
the final report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee (JPC) – 
which later became known as Government of India Act 1935 – but 
rejection of central portion of the JPC was passed by majority vote 
by the Indian Central Legislative Assembly. The Congress’ 
resolution for total rejection of the JPC was defeated. It must be 
mentioned here that for the purpose of Assembly business the 
nomenclature of Jinnah’s party was “Independent Party.” 

FEBRUARY 13, 1935 

Congress inspired an anonymous letter in the name of “J” published 
in the Times of India in which Congress’ frustration about Jinnah 
was expressed in this way: “Assembly by its approval of Mr. 
Jinnah’s ‘judgment’ discarded all immediate thought of an Indian 
‘nation’ embracing all India’s peoples. What he wants apparently is 
the creation of a ‘Hindu India’ and a ‘Muslim India’ in the north, 
composed of a solid block of Muslim States extending from the 
Afghan frontier as far as and including Bengal. This will exist as a 
perpetual menace overhanging ‘Hindu India’ of the South”. This 
meant that Jinnah was secretly working for the establishment of 
Pakistan. 

FEBRUARY 16, 1935 

The AIML Council chaired by Jinnah discussed various matters. A 
great concern was also expressed as to why Balochistan was not 
made a separate province at par with the other advanced provinces 
of India. 

 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 37 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
MARCH 1, 1935 

Jinnah-Prasad Talks ended in failure. Talks were held between 
these two great leaders – Jinnah as President of the AIML and 
Rajendra Prasad as President of the Indian National Congress. The 
Congress President who had felt hurt on account of Jinnah’s recent 
success in the Assembly feared that Jinnah may go for Pakistan. The 
Jinnah-Prasad Talks, however, failed to win over Jinnah on the 
issue of One Indian Nation. 

APRIL 22, 1935 

Jinnah addressed a meeting arranged by the Bombay Muslim 
Students Union in which he made it clear that the Hindu 
Mahasabha is working for the “complete supremacy and 
ascendency of Hindus”. They are not treating the Muslims as their 
equals. This is the position, Jinnah continued, under which the 
Congress is also working. This situation, Jinnah added, has forced 
the Muslims to resort to a different path.29 

APRIL 23, 1935 

Jinnah sailed to London from Bombay for the purpose of watching 
the final debates on the Government of India Bill 1935 based on JPC 
in the British Parliament. The purpose of this visit was also Jinnah’s 
concern that the Congress lobby might not be able to do anything 
against the separate electorates issue for the Muslims and the 
minorities. 

JUNE 4, 1935 

The Government of India Bill incorporating the JPC Report was 
passed by the House of Commons. 

 

                                                          
29 Times of India, April 23, 1935. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 38 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
JULY 24, 1935 

After a debate in the House of Lords, the Government of India Bill, 
as passed by the House of Commons, was approved. 

AUGUST 2, 1935 

The Government of India Bill passed by the British Parliament 
received the Royal Assent and became the Government of India Act 
1935 incorporating the Communal Award and other aspects of JPC 
Report. 

OCTOBER 1935 

Jinnah sold his property in London and returned to India. 

APRIL 11-12, 1936 

24th Session of AIML was held in Bombay and presided over by 
Syed Wazir Hassan. Jinnah also addressed this session. Addressing 
this session, Jinnah explained the coming dangers to the Muslims 
from the Congress and other Hindu organizations. In his speech, 
Jinnah made it clear that the Congress was “behaving like an 
ostrich, putting its head in the sand and thinking that nobody was 
observing it”. It was in this session that a unanimous resolution was 
passed by which Jinnah was authorized to constitute Muslim 
League Parliamentary Board consisting of 35 members for the 
purpose of coming elections. Full confidence in Jinnah was 
expressed in this session by various speakers as a “pilot” of the 
Muslim nation. The real purpose of this was that “the Muslims 
should organize themselves as one party, with an advanced and 
progressive programme”. 

JUNE 8-11, 1936 

First meeting of the Muslim League Parliamentary Board was 
arranged in Lahore and presided over by Jinnah. Of the 35 leaders 
invited at this meeting only 23 leaders participated but they 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 39 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
represented all the provinces of India. Thirteen aims and objectives 
of the Parliamentary Board were finalized including the safe 
religious and political future of the Muslim nation, preservation of 
Urdu as a national language, and protection of Muslim culture, etc. 
These were the aims for which the provincial Muslim League 
Parliamentary Boards were to be formed. Jinnah, Abdul Matin 
Chaudhry, and Raja of Mahmudabad were elected President, 
Secretary and Treasurer of this Central Board respectively. 

APRIL-OCTOBER 1936 

Jinnah toured different provinces, especially Sindh, Punjab, NWFP 
(now KP), Bengal and Assam to convince different Muslim leaders 
of the concerned provinces to unite but his efforts could not 
materialize because in every province the Muslims themselves were 
divided into various groups or parties. 

JANUARY 1937 

In a statement to the press, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru declared: 
“Essentially there were only two parties in the country, namely, the 
Government and the Congress”. Refuting this claim of Nehru, 
Jinnah declared that “there was a third party, namely, Indian 
Muslims”. 

JANUARY 13, 1937 

Sir Mohammad Yakub, a prominent Muslim leader, gave an 
interview to the representative of the Times of India in which he 
said that the real objective of the Congress was to merge the 
Muslims into the Hindu majority. He supported Jinnah’s efforts for 
the cause of the Muslim nation. 

JANUARY-MARCH 1937 

Election to the provincial legislatures was held in different 
provinces. Out of 482 seats reserved for the Muslims in the eleven 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 40 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
provinces, the AIML won only 25% of these seats, i.e., 106 seats. 
Congress could not win more than 5% of these seats, i.e., 26 seats. 
Along with it should also be known that of these 5% candidates, 3% 
belonged to the NWFP (now KP). The Congress’ performance in 
other Muslim majority or minority provinces was not more than 2% 
as a whole. This showed that the Muslim nation’s public opinion 
had turned against the Congress and other Hindu parties. However, 
the regional parties in the Muslim majority provinces attracted the 
Muslim masses. This meant that the Muslim population as a whole 
had turned against the Hindu Raj as claimed by the Congress and 
other Hindu parties. 

MARCH 17-18, 1937 

INC Working Committee meeting presided over by Jawaharlal 
Nehru was held in Delhi. In his address to this meeting, Nehru 
made it clear that the Hindu Raj was coming and that Congress was 
the only organization in the country with which the Government 
was authorized to negotiate. This alarmed all the Muslims, 
particularly those living in the Muslim majority provinces. 

MARCH 21, 1937 

In order to review the performance of AIML in the recent elections, 
a meeting of AIML Council was held. Expressing his view, Jinnah 
noted that the difference between the performance of Muslim 
majority provinces and Hindu majority provinces was “because of 
the differences between their cultures”. Jinnah also emphasized 
that “Muslims must unite as a nation, and then live or die as a 
united nation”.30 

 

                                                          
30 Quotes from the Proceedings of the Council Meeting of AIML, 21 March 
1937, in AIML Papers, Vol. 222, National Archives of Pakistan, Islamabad. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 41 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
APRIL 1937 

As Congress started dictating the British Government after the 
recent elections, Nehru demanded that the British Governors not 
use their power of veto against the resolutions or bills passed by the 
Congress ministries or their legislature. In order to counter this 
claim of Congress, the British Government asked the winning 
parties in Muslim majority provinces to form their ministries. 
Accordingly, the ministries in Punjab, Bengal, Assam, Sindh and 
NWFP were formed. 

JULY 1937 

Congress ministries in six Hindu majority provinces – UP, CP, 
Bihar, Orissa, Bombay, CP and Berar, Madras – were installed. 
With this the Congress started their propaganda against the AIML 
and Jinnah by leveling false charges so as to mislead the Muslim 
masses. Responding to these charges, Jinnah, in a statement to the 
press, warned Pandit Nehru and the Congress leaders to desist from 
this effort of “vilifying” and “misrepresenting” the Muslim demands 
and the stand taken by AIML. Jinnah also decided to sponsor 
certain Muslim journals and newspapers so that the Muslim cause 
could be popularized. 

OCTOBER 15-18, 1937 

25th session of the AIML was held at Lalbagh, Lucknow which was 
presided over by Jinnah. Raja of Mahmudabad, who was Chairman 
of the Reception Committee, made arrangements for this session 
from his own pocket. This session was particularly significant given 
the participation of Chief Ministers of all the Muslim majority 
provinces including, A.K. Fazlul Haq, Premier of Bengal, Sir 
Sikander Hayat Khan, Premier of Punjab, Sir Saadullah Khan, 
Premier of Assam, and Sir Ghulam Hussain Hidayatullah, Premier 
of Sindh. The Congress Raj in six Hindu majority provinces was 
termed by the Congress leaders themselves as the “Hindu Raj”, a 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 42 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
matter which alarmed the Muslim leaders of all the provinces 
whether they belonged to the AIML or other parties. Even Sir 
Sikander Hayat Khan, Chief Minister of Punjab, belonging to the 
Unionist Party felt challenged by the Congress’ threat.  In his 
speech, Jinnah made it clear that Congress had lost the support 
from Muslim masses all over the country. Jinnah also urged upon 
the Muslims to “equip yourselves as trained and disciplined 
soldiers. Create the feeling of esprit de corps, and of comradeship 
among yourselves”. In this way, he believed, the 80 million Muslims 
need not fear anything because they will ultimately succeed.  

The Congress leaders were perturbed by the success of this session 
and unity of the Muslim leaders belonging to all parties. Gandhi 
wrote a letter to Jinnah on October 19, 1937 in which he blamed that 
by his presidential speech Jinnah had made “a declaration of war”. 
Replying to this, Jinnah wrote to Gandhi what he said at Lucknow 
was “purely self-defence”. In this way a long correspondence 
continued between Jinnah and Gandhi, followed by Nehru-Jinnah 
correspondence, and then by a prolonged Bose-Jinnah 
correspondence. Jinnah befittingly replied to all of them and 
pleaded the cause of Muslim nation towards a destination. 

JULY 1937-NOVMBER 1939 

In July 1937 Congress ministries in six Hindu majority provinces 
were installed. The Congress ministries resigned as a protest 
against the British joining the Second World War (1939-1945). The 
Congress wanted Britain to join the War on the Congress’ terms 
which the British refused to accept. Jinnah and the AIML termed 
this Congress Raj as the “Hindu Raj” because these governments 
functioned against the very existence of the Muslims in their 
provinces which meant elimination of Muslim culture and 
civilization. Jinnah’s view was substantiated by the Pirpur Enquiry 
Report and Sharif Enquiry Report. 

 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 43 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
DECEMBER 22, 1939 

On a call by Jinnah and the AIML, the Muslims and other minorities 
celebrated this day as Day of Deliverance from the Congress Raj in 
the six Hindu majority provinces which was termed as the Hindu 
Raj. There were 11 total provinces in British India. Five provinces 
were Muslim majority provinces, but Balochistan was not given the 
status of a province.  In this celebration not only Muslims from all 
over India participated but other minorities including Scheduled 
Caste Hindus, Sikhs, and Christians fully sided with the Muslims. 
Thus an anti-Congress wave took over British India in the political 
sense which the British rulers could not ignore. Thus by this 
demonstration Jinnah’s status became equal to that of Gandhi and 
the Congress leaders. Consequently, in the political future of British 
India, the British Government could not do anything by ignoring 
Jinnah’s demand for Pakistan and the good future of Muslims, 
especially during the Second World War. Jinnah’s support became 
all the more necessary for another reason that half of the British 
Indian Army consisted of Muslim soldiers who considered Jinnah 
as their “Quaid-i-Azam”, i.e., the Greatest Leader. 

MARCH 22-24, 1940 

27th session of AIML was held at Lahore which was presided over 
by Quaid-i-Azam amongst great hopes and aspirations by Muslims 
all over the Indo-Pak subcontinent. In this session more than one 
lac Muslims from all over the subcontinent participated. Jinnah 
delivered his long presidential address on March 22. On March 23 
the famous “Pakistan Resolution” was presented which was passed 
unanimously. Leaders from all the provinces supported this 
resolution. Under this resolution the provinces of Bengal, Assam, 
Punjab, NWFP (now KP), Sindh and Balochistan were demanded 
as parts of Pakistan. The Congress leaders and the Hindu press were 
shocked over Jinnah’s announcement of Pakistan which they 
opposed tooth and nail. There were some other opponents of the 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 44 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
scheme of Pakistan, but Jinnah did not fear all this opposition 
because he had already organized the Muslim nation all over the 
subcontinent which stood behind Jinnah as a well-disciplined and 
united force under his leadership to achieve Pakistan under all 
circumstances. 

MARCH-APRIL 1942 

Sir Stafford Cripps, Leader of the House of Commons, came to India 
on March 22, 1942 to discuss the issue of transfer of power to 
Indians. This was the first serious attempt on behalf of British 
Government to discuss the issue of Pakistan and transfer of power 
to Indians. Cripps met Jinnah, Nehru and other Congress leaders. 
He heard Jinnah’s view on Pakistan and held discussions with other 
Indian leaders but ultimately published his draft proposals known 
as the “Cripps Proposals” in Indian newspapers on March 30. 
Jinnah termed these proposals as against the concept of Pakistan. 
The Congress also did not like the Cripps Proposals. Finally, on 
April 12 Sir Cripps departed from British India and his mission 
failed. 

AUGUST 1942 

Upon Gandhi’s insistence the Congress demanded from the British 
Government to “Quit India” and hand over power to the “Congress 
Caucus” which was calculated towards the “Hindu Brahman Raj”. A 
movement in this direction was started which failed because the 
Muslims and other minorities did not support Congress in this 
move. It also failed because Jinnah demanded from the British to 
“first divide and then quit”. 

SEPTEMBER 1944 

Jinnah-Gandhi Talks were held in Bombay. In these talks a number 
of meetings between Jinnah and Gandhi took place at Jinnah’s 
House in Bombay followed by exchange of a number of letters. 
Gandhi tried to give the impression that he was ready to accept the 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 45 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
idea of Pakistan, though it was unnatural division of India, but after 
the transfer of power from British to Congress – a plea which 
Jinnah felt was a dodging trick by Gandhi. Thus Jinnah refused. 
Jinnah wanted Pakistan before the departure of British from India. 
Gandhi tried to confuse Jinnah on a number of issues regarding 
Pakistan Resolution which Jinnah clearly explained in the interest 
of Muslims and Pakistan. Thus Gandhi-Jinnah Talks failed. 

JUNE-JULY 1945 

The Second World War came to an end in Europe in May 1945. As 
promised by the British Government, 22 Indian leaders belonging 
to different parties including Jinnah, Gandhi, Nehru and others 
were invited to meet at Simla on June 25, 1945 for the purpose of 
settling the future of British India. This is known as Simla 
Conference which continued up til July 14, 1945 with some 
intervals. Quaid-i-Azam pleaded Pakistan’s case. AIML, headed by 
Jinnah, faced Congress leaders as equals. Pakistan issue was the 
single issue on which the Quaid was not ready to surrender. The 
Congress did not agree. On this plea, the British announced failure 
of the Simla Conference. 

AUGUST 1945 

British Government announced the holding of elections in the next 
winter 1945-1946. 

AUGUST-NOVEMBER 1945 

Jinnah and other AIML candidates started their election campaign, 
especially in the provinces which were to form Pakistan. Sindh, 
Balochistan and NWFP (now KP) were specially concentrated apart 
from the Punjab, Bengal and Assam. A number of Muslim leaders 
left Congress and other parties, and joined the AIML. This was a 
very successful election campaign. For instance, Khan Abdul 
Qayyum from NWFP and Mian Iftikharuddin from Punjab left 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 46 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
Congress and joined AIML. Similarly, other desertions took place 
and the AIML became very popular. 

NOVEMBER-DECEMBER 1945 

Elections for the members of Indian Central Assembly were held. 
In these elections 30 seats were reserved for the Muslims. All these 
seats of the Central Assembly were won by AIML candidates. Thus 
AIML’s victory in these elections was 100%. The candidates backed 
by the Congress and other parties were miserably defeated. 

JANUARY-APRIL 1946 

Elections to 11 provincial assemblies were held in different 
provinces. 491 seats were reserved for Muslims in the provincial 
assemblies. Out of 491, 429 seats were won by the Muslim League 
candidates. Thus the Muslim League victory was about 90%. These 
elections proved that 90% majority of the Muslims of the Indo-Pak 
subcontinent were in favour of Pakistan. In the Punjab Assembly, 
majority of 88 members out of 175 were with the Muslim League. 
Of the 88 members claimed by Nawab Mamdot, leader of the 
Punjab Muslim League, 73 belonged to the Muslim League, plus 5 
Independent and 10 others. Despite this, Malik Khizar Hayat 
Tiwana’s Ministry was installed, although his Unionist Party was 
able to win only 20 seats. This was to facilitate him because of the 
Congress’ designs against Pakistan. As a result, agitation against 
Khizar started which resulted in his resignation towards the end of 
March 1947. 

APRIL 1, 1946 

Jinnah’s interview to Norman Cliff, Foreign Editor of the News 
Chronicle, London, was published in the Times of India, Bombay in 
which Jinnah said: “I do not regard myself as an Indian. India is a 
State of nationalities, including two major nations, and all we claim 
is a distinct, sovereign State for our nation – Pakistan”. Jinnah also 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 47 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
said: “There is no room for us to compromise on the issue of 
Pakistan”.31 

MARCH-AUGUST 1946 

Cabinet Mission consisting of Lord Pethick-Lawrence, Secretary of 
State for India, Sir Stafford Cripps, President of the Board of Trade, 
and Mr. A. V. Alexander, the First Lord of the Admiralty arrived in 
Delhi on March 24. Soon they started meeting the Indian 
politicians. Initially each member met each politician separately, 
and later collectively. On March 30 Cripps had a meeting with 
Jinnah and found him “calm, reasonable but completely firm on 
Pakistan”. The Delegation also met the Congress leaders and others 
who were opposed to the idea of Pakistan. During May 5-12, the 
Delegation had another meeting in Simla with the Indian leaders 
including Jinnah, Gandhi, Nehru and others. As a result of these 
talks, the Cabinet Mission announced the following 
recommendations on May 16: 1) Government of the Union will deal 
with subjects of foreign affairs, defense and communications only; 
2) 11 provinces of British India should be grouped together in three 
categories: a) Group A will consist of provinces of Madras, Bombay, 
UP, Bihar, CP and Orissa, b) Group B will consist of Punjab, NWFP, 
Sindh, and one representative from Balochistan, c) Group C shall 
consist of Bengal and Assam. Each of these groups will hold their 
separate meetings and decide their own future to the extent that if 
any province decided to opt out of the group, it was allowed to do 
so.  

This created a very critical situation for the AIML and Jinnah. A 
meeting of the AIML Council was called in Delhi on June 5 in which 
Jinnah gave an “in camera” address and asked for patience in the 
new scenario and called for readiness to work the Cabinet Mission’s 
proposals because it contained “the foundations, the basis of 
Pakistan”. He was fully aware that the Cabinet Mission “mutilated” 

                                                          
31 Times of India, April 1, 1946. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 48 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
facts about Pakistan. Still Jinnah believed: “So far as Pakistan is 
concerned let me tell you that Muslim India will not rest content 
until we have established full complete sovereign Pakistan”.32 The 
Council meeting continued to discuss Cabinet Mission Proposals 
for four days. 

On the basis of this, the Delegation and the Viceroy contacted the 
Congress and the AIML Presidents to form the Interim 
Government. Lord Wavell, the Viceroy, proposed that in the 
Executive Council, 5 members of the Congress, 5 members from the 
AIML, 2 members from the Minorities, and 3 members from others 
shall be included. The Congress objected to this parity between the 
AIML and Congress. Jinnah termed this Congress objection to what 
had already been agreed between him and the Congress leaders 
with the Congress Delegation. The Cabinet Delegation abandoned 
the talks for formation of Interim Government, left India on June 
29 and went to London. 

Maulana Azad as President of the Indian National Congress was 
replaced towards the end of May and Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru 
joined as the new President of the Congress. Thus Azad whom 
Jinnah had rightly termed as the “showboy of the Congress” was 
used and shunted putting the Congress in the hands of Pandit 
Nehru to deal with the British Government in the new scenario for 
transfer of power in a more confident way. On July 8, Nehru 
announced in Bombay that Congress had formed the Congress 
Volunteer Corps to counter the Muslim League National Guards.33 
This created an alarming situation because Congress was now bent 
upon crushing the Muslims for the purpose of keeping India united. 

To ponder over this alarming situation, Jinnah convened the 
meeting of the AIML Council on July 29 in which it was decided to 

                                                          
32 Times of India, June 6, 1946. 

33 Indian Annual Register, Vol. II, 4. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 49 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
reject the Cabinet Mission Proposals and resort to Direct Action to 
achieve Pakistan.34 After three days’ deliberations the Council 
passed a long Resolution which stipulated that “Council of AIML 
has resolved to reject the proposals embodied in the Statement of 
Cabinet Delegation and the Viceroy dated 16th May due to the 
intransigence of the Congress on the one hand and breach of faith 
with the Muslims by the British Government on the other”. This 
Resolution also called “upon the Muslim Nation to stand to a man 
behind their sole representative and authoritative organization, the 
AIML, and to be ready for every sacrifice”.  Actually the Viceroy and 
Congress both had agreed to form Interim Government on the basis 
of Muslim League “Congress” and 3 for minorities formula. Later 
the Viceroy and Congress deviated from their promise. The promise 
of equality of the Muslim League with the Congress previously 
agreed to by the Viceroy and Congress was broken. That is why the 
aforementioned Resolution blamed the Viceroy, Cabinet 
Delegation, and the Congress for “breach of faith” and promise. 

AUGUST 16, 1946 

On a call by Jinnah, this day was celebrated all over British India as 
“Direct Action Day”. Demonstrations against the British and the 
Congress were carried out throughout the country. Muslims and the 
Hindus clashed with each other at certain places in which hundreds 
and thousands of Muslims and Hindus were killed or injured. This 
forced the Congress leadership and the British Government to come 
to terms with Jinnah. 

AUGUST 24, 1946 

The Viceroy sided with the Congress leadership and announced the 
formation of a 12-member Interim Government headed by Pandit 
Nehru. This included 5 Hindus, 3 Muslims, one representatives 
each from the scheduled castes, Christians, Sikhs and Parsis. 

                                                          
34 Times of India, July 30, 1946. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 50 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
Jinnah termed this as a breach of contract made at Simla and 
termed it as a “blow to Muslim India”.35 Jinnah also warned the 
Government that the Muslim League would soon start “grim 
struggle” to achieve Pakistan.36 Accordingly, Jinnah started 
organizing the Muslim League National Guards and appealed to 
the Khaksars to join them in their struggle against the Government. 

SEPTEMBER 16, 1946 

Forced by the circumstances and on instructions from the British 
Prime Minister, the Viceroy met Jinnah and asked him to join the 
Interim Government. As a follow up of this meeting Jinnah laid 
down certain conditions for joining the Interim Government with 
the approval of the Muslim League Working Committee and the 
Committee of Action. 

OCTOBER 26, 1946 

After a prolonged discussion and dialogue between Jinnah and the 
Viceroy in which Nehru and Gandhi were also taken into confidence 
by the Viceroy, Jinnah’s terms for joining the Interim Government 
were accepted by all the parties and the following 5 Muslim League 
nominees joined the Interim Government: 1) Liaquat Ali Khan – 
Finance, 2) I. I. Chundrigar – Commerce, 3) Abdur Rab Nishtar – 
Port and Air, 4) J. N. Mandal – Legislative, and 5) Raja Ghazanfar 
Ali Khan – Health.37 The most important point   proposed by Jinnah 
to which the Viceroy agreed was that “the joining of the Government 
will not mean that the League has surrendered its goal of 
Pakistan”.38 In this way Muslim League joined the Interim 
Government with commitment to Pakistan as their goal. In this 

                                                          
35 Times of India, August 27, 1946. 
36 Times of India, October 28, 1946. 
37 Times of India, October 28, 1946. 
38 Times of India, October 14, 1946. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 51 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
connection H. V. Hodson writes: “By this exchange, therefore, Mr. 
Jinnah had scored a very important tactical advantage”.39 

NOVEMBER 1946 

The Muslims in Bihar province were killed on a large scale by the 
anti-Muslim Hindu gangsters in which certain Congress Ministers 
of the Interim Government were also involved. This created a great 
wave of anger in the Muslim majority areas. On November 14 
Jinnah warned these Congress Ministers not to do so and at the 
same time issued an appeal to the Muslims of the majority Muslim 
areas to remain calm and not to be misled by the Hindu leaders’ 
provocations so that “our demand for Pakistan” is not hampered.40 

DECEMBER 1946 

Jinnah demanded that existing Central Legislative Assembly 
should be divided into two Constituent Assemblies – one of 
Hindustan and the other for Pakistan. Nehru did not agree to this 
demand. But the tension in the Muslim majority was increasing. In 
order to solve this problem, the British Prime Minister decided to 
invite the Indian leaders to London. Consequently, Lord Wavell, the 
Viceroy, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Liaquat Ali Khan, M. A. Jinnah 
and Sardar Baldev Singh proceeded to London on December 1, 
1946. A number of meetings between these leaders and the Prime 
Minister Attlee were held and a final agreement was reached 
between them on December 6. By this agreement both the parties 
accepted that any decision regarding the One or Two Constituent 
Assemblies will be imposed unless and until both parties come to 
an agreement. Nehru returned on December 7, but Jinnah 
remained in London until December 15. In an interview to BBC 
London Jinnah made it clear that India should be divided into 

                                                          
39 Harry V. Hodson, The Great Divide: Britain-India-Pakistan, (London: 
Hutchinson, 1969), 169. 
40 Times of India, November 15, 1946. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 52 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
Hindustan and Pakistan because “we differ in our history, culture, 
language, architecture, music, law, jurisprudence, calendar and our 
entire social fabric and code of life”.41 In another interview on the 
eve of his departure from London, Jinnah made it clear that the 
Muslim members will not participate in the existing Legislative 
Assembly unless their separate Assembly is created. 

JANUARY-MARCH 1947 

Despite the Muslim League majority with 80% votes, the Punjab 
Governor installed Sir Khizar Hayat Khan’s Ministry in Punjab with 
the support of non-Muslim members in March 1946. When Quaid-
i-Azam and the Muslim League decided to start Civil Disobedience 
Movement, the anti-Khizar Movement started in January 1947. The 
prolonged protests and demonstrations took place in almost all the 
cities of Punjab against the Khizar Ministry. This created a very 
alarming situation for the Government because Punjab was 
considered by the British as the basis of their power which was 
shaken by these demonstrations. Ultimately Khizar was forced to 
resign on March 2, 1947. This was because of the pressure of 
thousands of the Muslim League protestors put in jail by the Khizar 
Ministry. They were all released in order to bring the situation to 
normalcy after March 2, 1947. 

FEBRUARY 20, 1947 

Seeing Jinnah’s intentions that he is ready to go to any extent for 
the creation of Pakistan, British Prime Minister Mr. Clement Attlee 
announced in the House of Commons that the British will leave 
India by June 1948 by transferring power to the Indian hands.42 

 

                                                          
41 Z. H. Zaidi, Jinnah Papers, Vol. XIV, 737. 
42 Times of India, February 21, 1947. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 53 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
FEBRUARY 20-JUNE 4, 1947 

In NWFP (now KP) Assembly there were 38 seats of the Muslim 
members of the Assembly. Of these 19 were secured by the Congress 
members, 17 by the Muslim League members, and 2 seats went to 
the members of Jamiat Ulama-i-Hind. Thus majority seats were 
won by the members of the Congress and the Muslim League, but 
the majority of the Muslim votes went to the members of Muslim 
League as a whole because Muslim League secured 147,380 or 
about 45% votes, but the Congress secured 130,975 or 39% of the 
votes. Thus majority of the voters were in favour of the Muslim 
League which was further confirmed later in the referendum held 
in July 1947. Because of this majority of the Muslim votes, the 
Muslim League decided to stage anti-Khan Sahib Civil 
Disobedience Movement on February 20, 1947 which paralyzed the 
Khan government. It was as a result of June 3, 1947 Partition Plan 
and on call of Lord Mountbatten, the Viceroy, that Jinnah called off 
the anti-Khan Sahib movement and waited for the referendum. 

MARCH 22, 1947 

Lord Mountbatten replaced Lord Wavell as the new Viceroy of 
British India with Congress’ blessings. With Gandhi’s and Nehru’s 
backing Mountbatten first tried “to work for Unitary Government 
for India on the basis of the Cabinet Mission Plan”, but failed to do 
so. It was because of organized Muslim pressure led by Jinnah that 
Mountbatten came to be favorable to the idea of Partition of India. 
Marathon dialogues and meetings took place before settling the 
partition scheme. 

APRIL 9, 1947 

In a meeting at the Delhi Viceroy’s house, Lord Mountbatten 
offered Jinnah to become Prime Minister of united India and leave 
the Pakistan demand. Jinnah not only refused this offer but showed 
his determination to get “full Pakistan” consisting of full six 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 54 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
provinces of the Punjab, Sindh, Balochistan, NWFP (now KP), 
Bengal and Assam with its separate armed forces. 

APRIL 15, 1947 

A meeting of all the Governors of the provinces was held at Delhi in 
which Mountbatten’s talks with Gandhi, Nehru, Jinnah and other 
Indian leaders was discussed. Because of fear of civil war, 
particularly in the Punjab, NWFP, and Bihar with the danger to 
spread to other provinces and Jinnah’s pressure for Pakistan duly 
backed by united Muslim public opinion all over the country, it was 
ultimately decided that the Indo-Pak subcontinent should be 
divided into two countries: Hindustan and Pakistan. Thus the later 
dialogues with Indian leaders were focused on how to divide the 
country and carve out two new dominions. Congress leaders gave a 
tough time to settle the partition issues, but Jinnah continued to 
pursue his goal of Pakistan. 

JUNE 3, 1947 

With the consent of Indian leaders including Jinnah, Gandhi and 
Nehru, and approved by the British Prime Minister, Lord 
Mountbatten announced the Partition Plan which is also known as 
the Mountbatten Plan. According to this Plan, India was to be 
divided into two parts – Hindustan and Pakistan – each having its 
own Constituent Assembly. Bengal and the Punjab were to be 
divided into Hindu majority and Muslim majority areas. Muslim 
majority parts were to be included into Pakistan. Respective 
provincial assemblies were to decide accordingly. Referendum was 
to be held in NWFP (now KP) and Sylhet (Assam). Balochistan 
Municipality was to decide about Balochistan. Armed forces were to 
be divided but the Common Command of General Auchinleck was 
to continue at Delhi for one year. 

 

 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 55 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
JUNE 5, 1947 

In order to implement the Partition Plan, a Partition Council 
headed by Lord Mountbatten was created. Jinnah, Nehru, Liaquat 
Ali Khan and Vallabhbhai Patel were to be its members. Any other 
person could also be co-opted with the proceedings of the Partition 
Council. On Quaid-i-Azam’s pleading, it was also decided that the 
Interim Government will not interfere into the business of the 
Partition Council. 

JUNE 20, 1947 

Bengal Assembly members met in two groups. One group 
represented non-Muslim majority areas of the Bengal under the 
presidency of Maharaja of Burdwan. This group decided by a vote 
of 58 to 21 that non-Muslim majority areas of Bengal should join 
Hindustan Constituent Assembly. The other group of Bengal 
Assembly members headed by Nurul Amin decided by a vote of 107 
to 34 that they would join the Pakistan Constituent Assembly with 
Dhaka as the provincial capital of Eastern Bengal. 

JUNE 23, 1947 

The Punjab Assembly as a whole held its meeting at Lahore 
presided over by Dewan Bahadur S. P. Singha, the Speaker. 91 
Members of the Assembly voted for the Pakistan Constituent 
Assembly, while 77 members voted for the Hindustan Constituent 
Assembly. Thus the majority went for non-division of Punjab 
province. But the decision had to be taken in the light of 
Mountbatten Plan. Accordingly, the members met in two separate 
meetings – one in Western Punjab and the other in Eastern Punjab. 
In a meeting, Western Punjab Assembly decided by 69 votes to 27 
under the presidency of Dewan Bahadur S. P. Singha to join the 
Pakistan Constituent Assembly. Eastern Punjab Assembly in a 
separate meeting presided over by Sardar Kapur Singh decided to 
join the Hindustan Constituent Assembly by 50 votes to 22. 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 56 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
JUNE 26, 1947 

Sindh Legislative Assembly held its meeting in Karachi and decided 
to join Pakistan by a majority vote of 33 members. 

JUNE 27, 1947 

At the Partition Council meeting presided over by the Viceroy in 
which Quaid-i-Azam also participated, it was decided that 
headquarters of the Pakistan Army will be established in 
Rawalpindi and the headquarters of the Indian Army will be in 
Delhi. However, the Supreme Commander of both the armies will 
continue to function in Delhi for another year. 

JUNE 29, 1947 

A joint session of the Shahi Jirga and the elected members of the 
Quetta Municipality, as required under the Mountbatten Plan, met 
in Quetta under the presidency of Nawab Mohammad Khan Jogezai 
and unanimously decided to join Pakistan. 54 members 
unanimously decided to join the Pakistan Constituent Assembly. 
However, 8 non-Muslim members were absent. 

JULY 6-7, 1947 

The Sylhet Referendum was held as part of the Mountbatten Plan 
in which 239,619 votes were cast in favor of joining Eastern Bengal, 
while 184,041 for remaining in Assam. Thus with a clear-cut 
majority the Sylhet district of Assam province joined Eastern 
Bengal province of Pakistan. 

JULY 8, 1947 

On Jinnah’s recommendation, the Viceroy agreed to declare 
Karachi as the capital of Pakistan. 

 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 57 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
JULY 11, 1947 

The Partition Council presided over by the Viceroy participated by 
Jinnah and Liaquat, finally decided to divide the assets of the Army, 
Navy, and Air Force between India and Pakistan. 

JULY 15, 1947 

On Quaid-i-Azam’s urgings, the Viceroy agreed to the present shape 
of the flag of Pakistan. 

JULY 19, 1947 

Royal Assent was given to the Indian Independence Act 1947 passed 
by the British Parliament. Thus the Partition Plan of 3 June 1947 
was given legal cover by which two dominions of Hindustan and 
Pakistan were to be established by 15 August 1947. A provision was 
also included that until such time that these two dominions frame 
their new separate constitution, they could adopt/adapt the 
Government of India Act 1935 as an interim legal cover. 

JULY 7-20, 1947 

The result of NWFP (now KP) was declared on July 20 by which 
about 51% of the voters voted. Of this 286,370 votes were cast for 
Pakistan and 2874 votes for united India. Thus 99% voted for 
Pakistan. In this way the people of NWFP decided to join Pakistan. 
Before the referendum Dr. Khan Sahib, the Chief Minister had 
promised to resign, but after the Referendum he did not honour his 
commitment. But after creation of Pakistan, his Ministry was 
dismissed by the Governor of NWFP. 

AUGUST 10, 1947 

First meeting of the Pakistan Constituent Assembly was held in 
Karachi in which the members signed their presence. 

 
 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 58 TIMELINE (1857-1947) 

  



 
AUGUST 11, 1947 

Quaid-i-Azam was elected as the first President of the Pakistan 
Constituent Assembly. Thus he delivered his first speech in the 
Pakistan Constituent Assembly. 

AUGUST 13, 1947 

Lord and Lady Mountbatten arrived in Karachi and presided over 
the first Provisional Pakistan Cabinet at the Government House, 
Karachi. 

AUGUST 14, 1947 

At the transfer of power ceremony held at the Pakistan Constituent 
Assembly, Mountbatten transferred power to Pakistan on behalf of 
the British Crown. Thus Pakistan became an independent country 
under the leadership of Quaid-i-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah. 

 

★★★★★ 

 

STRUGGLE FOR PAKSTAN 59 TIMELINE (1857-1947)