
CHAPTER 1

THE PRESCRIBED MYTHS

In every country the textbook is the primary implement of education at the school and
pre-university stages of instruction. In Pakistan it is the only instrument of imparting
education on all levels, because the teacher and the lecturer don't teach or lecture but
repeat what it contains and the student is encouraged or simply ordered to memorize
its contents. Further, for the young student the textbook is the most important book in
his little world: he is forced to buy it, he carries it to the classroom every day, he has it
open before him when the teacher is teaching, he is asked to learn portions of it by rote,
and he is graded by the quantity of its contents that he can regurgitate.

The ultimate supremacy of the textbook is confined by its official provenance. Since the
early 1960s the planning, preparation and publication of all textbooks for classes 1-12
are the responsibility of the Textbook Boards, of which there is one in each province.
These bodies are created and controlled by the provincial Department of Education, and
their personnel is recruited from the provincial education service. Their textbooks are
generally written by a team of authors, then corrected and supervised by another
person or a group of persons, and finally edited by another individual. Then the
manuscript is submitted to the National Review Committee of the Ministry of
Education of the Government of Pakistan, which checks its accuracy and approves of its
"ideological" content. When the book has been published, it is prescribed by the
Provincial Government as the "sole textbook" for the relevant class in all the schools of
the province. Each copy of the book carries 1) the names of authors, supervisors and
editors. 2) the imprimatur of the National Review Committee, and 3) the official notice
that it is the only prescribed textbook. In some books there is a warning issued by the
Chairman of the Board that the students must not buy or use any "additional"
textbooks.

It becomes necessary to examine and scrutinize these textbooks because 1) they form the
foundations of the pre-university education system, and, in one case, of the university
system, 2) they are prepared with such great care and attention. 3) they are written by
the country's leading college and university teachers, and 4) they are the only source of
information for millions of students whose education stops at or before the 12th class.

History as a subject in the schools was abolished by the government of Field Marshal
Ayub Khan. Its place has been taken by a subject called "Mu'ashrati Ulum" or "Social
Studies" for classes 1-8 and by mother subject called "Mutala'a-i-Pakistan" or "Pakistan
Studies" for classes 9-12. Both are amalgams of bits of geography, history, economics,
civics, Islamic Studies and international relations.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 8



In the following sections I provide the reader with the major inaccuracies, distortions,
exaggerations and slants to be found in each officially prepared and prescribed textbook
and in a representative selection of private commercial publications which are in wide
use as textbooks. As there is no library which keeps all the textbooks published since
1947 my presentation is confined, with a few exceptions, to the books which have
appeared during the last twelve years and are in current use. In the annotation of the
items prepared by the Textbook Boards I have omitted the statements that they were
approved by the National Review Committee and prescribed as sole textbooks by the
governments of the provinces; these announcements should be taken for granted.

Primary Level: Urdu Medium
Class 1

Jadid Mu'oshrati Ulum by a Board of Senior General Knowledge
Teachers, West Punjab Textbook Depot. Lahore. n.d., pp.16.

"Question: Who created Pakistan?"

"Answer: The Quaid-i-Azam created Pakistan"

"Question: What is the Quaid-i-Azam's actual name?"

"Answer: Quaid-i-Azam's actual name is Muhammad Ali Jinnah"(p. 3).

The first question and its answer lead to several reflections, both of pedagogics and
historical substance. Is it wise to introduce a 5-year old student on his first day in school
to national history through such a naive question? With his limited intelligence, little
ability to grasp historical facts, and total incapacity to analyze concepts — and all these
weaknesses maximized by his stepping into an entirely new world, — in what way
does the answer advance his information or knowledge?

In the prevailing teaching system the student will repeat aloud the answer twenty times
in as many minutes in the company of his fellows in the class, and in the resulting
cacophony lose all sense of what was created by whom. If his intelligence or curiosity is
above par, he would like to know the "why" of the creation after its "what" and "by
whom"; but the answer to the "why" is not in the book. It would have been more logical
and to the point and also more suited to his age to use the following catechism:

Question: What is the name of our country?

Answer. The name of our country is Pakistan.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 9



Question: What does this name mean?

Answer. It means land of the pure.

Question: How is the word made up?

Answer P stands for the Punjab, A for the NWFP (Afghan province), K for
Kashmir. S for Sindh, and TAN for Baluchistan.

Question: Who invented this word?

Answer. It was invented by Chaudhri Rahmat Ali.

Question: Who created Pakistan?

Answer, Quaid-i-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah created Pakistan.

But then Rahmat Ali will appear in the book before Jinnah, and the ideological masters
of the country will not sanction the order of precedence.

The problem of historical substance exists on a higher plane and eludes the
comprehension of both the teacher and he writer of the textbook. The problem is: did
Jinnah alone create Pakistan? The question leads directly to a sophisticated discussion
of an historical and philosophical nature. Legally and constitutionally. Pakistan was
created by the British Parliament which passed the Indian Independence Act of July
1947. Politically, it was created by the popular support given to the All India Muslim
League by the Muslims of India and by the tripartite negotiations among the Muslim
League, the Congress and the British. Morally, it was created by an urge among the
Muslims to have a country of their own where they would not be subject to a
permanent and unalterable Hindu majority. One could also say, with much justification,
that it was created by the Hindus. Had the Hindu leaders shown greater wisdom, more
flexibility and less arrogance, the Muslim League would not have insisted on a partition
of India. It was Sardar Vallablthhai Patel's declaration that India would rather live in
peace without the permanent headache of a Muslim problem which tilted the balance of
decision in favor of a partition and signaled Congress acquiescence in its
consummation. We must remember that in May 1946 Jinnah had accepted the Cabinet
Mission Plan, thus abandoning the Pakistan ideal.

Another aspect of the same problem is summed up in the academic but pertinent
question: would Pakistan have come into existence if Jinnah had died in say 1945 or
even 1946? Arguments can be given on both sides. Jinnah was the supreme leader, with
no successors, alternatives, deputies, assistants, substitutes, proxies or replacements in
sight. The Congress had a long line of well-established succession and a large group of

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 10



top-ranking leaders with rich public experience and long political braining. The League
had neither. (Compare the personnel of the Working Committee of the All India
Congress Committee with that of the All India Muslim League Working Committee,
and the point is painfully made). Had Jinnah gone to his Maker, the League would have
been a party not only without a head but also without a mind or a heart or any other
vital organ. Look at the League group what negotiated with the Cabinet Mission.
Consider the persons who accompanied Jinnah in his talks with Mountbatten.
Contemplate the League nominees in the interim government. Was there anyone who
could have replaced Jinnah even for five minutes and carried on a coherent
conversation or defended a point or argued for or against a proposition? Liaquat Ali
Khan? Sardar Abdur Rab Nishtar? Raja Ghazanfar Ali Khan? All pygmies of short
public lives and even shorter statures.

What is the explanation of this absence of leadership? Did Jinnah trust none of his men?
Or, did he find none worth trusting? How did this unusual and ominous phenomenon
affect the progress of the Pakistan movement? Isn't this a characteristic (and tragic)
feature of Muslim politics? The Khaksar movement was nothing but Inayatullah Proja
Party and A.K. Fazlul Hay were interchangeable terms. The Khudai Khidmaigars were
born, lived and died with Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan. Were the Muslim League of the
years of the Pakistan movement and Jinnah twins? The door is patent for discussion.

The other side of the coin is inscribed with equally eristic phrases. One could
reasonably argue that by 1945 or 1946 the Pakistan demand had reached a pitch of
excitement, enthusiasm and conviction which even Jinnah's demise could not have
lowered by a hairbreadth. The impetus was too great to be reversed. The gulf between
Hindus and Muslims had become too deep and wide to be bridged over. Jinnah or no
Jinnah, nothing less than a partition would have satisfied the Muslims.

I have gone into these details to demonstrate the unwisdom of feeding class I students
on such indigestible historical pap. A textbook should shape its contents to fit the size of
the student's mind, not to fluster and confound it. Asking the students of such tender
age to learn such questions and answers by mere habituation through unintelligent
memory is training them in knowing everything by rote. Let us refrain from making
history into a multiplication table.

Muashrati Ulum, Shakil Brothers, Karachi, n.d. 4: p. 24.

"Question: Who gave Liaquat Ali Khan the title of Quaid-Millat?"

"Answer. Liaquat Ali Khan was given the title of Quaid-e-Millat by the Pakistani
nation."

"Question: Where is the marzr of Shahid-i-Millat Liaquat Ali Khan situated?"

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 11



"Answer: The mazar of Shahid-i-Millat Liaquat Ali Khan is situated in Karachi"
(p.5).

The lesson on Mohanjo Daro does not tell the student where it is located
(p.I5).

The lesson on Pakistan's friends in the world contains 12 Muslim
countries: the 13th name is Australia (p. 20).

The lesson on the Taj Mahal does not even hint at what the building is
meant for (p. 23).

If patriotism and loyalty to the memory of Jinnah dictated a reference to him in class I
textbook, there was no such compulsion in the case of Liaquat Ali Khan. Anyway the
elementary stage of education should not be converted into a platform for praising dead
prime ministers. I can name fifty public figures from Sayyid Ahmad Khan and Sayyid
Ameer Ali to Fazlul Haq and the Raja of Mahmudabad whose individual contribution
to the Muslim nationalist struggle was immeasurably greater than Liaquat Ali Khan's.

In fact, Liaquat's inclusion in the textbook is a particularly ill-suited choice. Not only ill-
suited, but poignant in the light of Jinnah-Liaquat relationship. This needs some
elaboration.

In 1945 Liaquat signed an agreement with Bhulabhai Desai of the Congress party,
committing the Muslim League to a certain line of action on future constitutional
progress of the country. He did this after telling Desai that Jinnah was a sick man and
was dying and if the Congress desired a lasting and practicable solution of the Muslim
problem it should deal with him (Liaquat) rather than with Jinnah. It was a secret and
shady deal and Jinnah was neither consulted nor informed. When he read the news and
the text of the Liaquat-Desai pact in the press he was shocked, and considered it as an
act of treachery on Liaquat's part, and ordered his domestic staff not to let Liaquat enter
his residence if he came to visit him. (This was told to me by Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada,
who was at this time acting as honorary private secretary to Jinnah in Bombay).

In 1946 the first list of Muslim League nominees on the Viceroy's Executive Council
which Jinnah sent to Lord Wavell did not contain Liaquat's name but in his place
Nawab Muhammad Ismail Khan's. But when Ismail divulged the secret of his
nomination to a journalist who carried the tale to Jinnah his name was dropped and
substituted with Liaquat's. (Information given to me by Pirzada and later confirmed by
K. H. Khurshid in a conversation with me).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 12



Why didn't Jinnah expel Liaquat from the League and get rid of someone whom he
considered as a traitor within the camp? The same answer was given to me by Pirzada,
Khuishid, Chaudhri Muhammad Ali and Professor I. H. Qureshi. The years 1945-47
swore the most delicate in the annals of the Pakistan movement. Unity in the Muslim
League ranks had top priority. Before 1945 Jinnah had publicly called Liaquat his "right
hand man". Liaquat was also the General Secretary of the All India Muslim League. He
accompanied Jinnah in all the negotiations with the British and the Congress during this
period. He was also the deputy leader of the Muslim League parliamentary party in the
Indian Legislative Assembly. Even a hint of a split in the top leadership of the League at
this time would have spelt disaster for the party's public image and its standing and
credibility on the political scene of the country. So Liaquat was retained and permitted
to act as a League leader, but no love was lost between him and Jinnah.

I was also told by Sir Muhammad Zafrullah Khan that in July 1947 he had carried a
message from Jinnah to Nawab Muhammad Hamidullah Khan of Bhopal asking him if
he would be prepared to come over and become the first prime Minister of Pakistan.
The Nawab declined the offer for personal masons. Recently it has been reported in the
Urdu press of Pakistan that a similar offer was made by Jinnah to the Nawab of
Bahawalpur, but with no success. It is thus clear that Liaquat Ali Khan got his job in
Pakistan by default, not on merit.

Even as Prime Minister, Liaquat did not enjoy the trust of Jinnah. How could he with
this background? Chaudhri Muhammad Ali implied in his talks with me that the two
men were not even on speaking terms except in public and large company.

M. A. H. Ispahani said that the Prime Minister did not take the files to the Governor
General for personal discussion but sent them by the hand of his secretary.

The tragedy of this relationship is confirmed by the memoirs of Miss Fatima Jinnah (the
typed manuscript of My Brother in the archives of the Quaid-i-Azam Papers in the
Federal Ministry of Education), who writes that when Liaquat and others came to see
Jinnah in Ziarat during his last illness he refused to see them and, after they had gone
away, told her that they had come to see how soon he was going to die.

There are people, including Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, who suspect that Jinnah's death
took place in extremely suspicious circumstances, and that the Prime Minister had
something to do with the creation of these circumstances.

Thus there is sufficient evidence from authentic quarters now prove that Liaquat Ali
Khan, in spite of being the first prime minister of the country, was far from being a
national hero. His own record in office provides additional support to this contention.
He failed to expedite the process of constitution making and died after more than four
years in command without giving the country its basic law. He made a deliberate

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 13



decision to refuse to visit the Soviet Union from which he had received an invitation.
Instead, he chose to go to the United States and take Pakistan into the American camp,
thus initiating a slide which lead, by stages, to friendship, junior partnership,
dependence, obedience, beggary and servitude. He groomed certain bureaucrats for
high political offices and preferred their advice to the counsel of his political colleagues,
he neglected the task of organizing the Pakistan Muslim League and making it into, a
grassroots party. He chose inefficient and weak politicians and installed them at the
centre and in the provinces. He did nothing to meet the needs or allay the fears of the
indigenous populations of East Bengal. On the contrary, he posted arrogant,
unsympathetic and self-willed Punjabi and Urdu-speaking civil servants to the eastern
wing, laying the fast brick around the foundation stone of Bangladesh. He started the
practice of nomination to fill in the vacancies occurring in the membership of the
Constituent Assembly (which also acted as the National Assembly). He appointed
members of parliament as governors and ambassadors, allowing them to retain their
seats in the house.

Of course, all this cannot be told to the young school students for they will not
understand it. Such detailed information should come later, preferably in classes 11-12,
and in full amplitude in classes 13-14. But these facts of history will not be palatable to
senior students if they have been brought up for 10 years on inaccurate and tendentious
stuff.

Anyway, to present to class I students such a controversial figure as a national hero
only second to Jinnah is to trespass on the national pantheon.

Class 2

Jadid Mu'ashrati Ulum by a Board of Senior General Knowledge Teachers,
West Punjab Textbook Depot, Lahore, n.d., pp.16.

"Question: When was Pakistan created?"

"Answer. Pakistan was created in [men] 14 August 1947" (p. 3). On Jinnah's
educational career: he earned a degree in law in England" (p. 4).

"Question: How did Jinnah come so think of creating Pakistan?"

"Answer. The people of India were demanding freedom from the British. Pandit
Nehru said that after independence there will be a government of the
Hindus in India. The Quaid-i-Azam said that Muslims also lived here
[and] Muslims should have a separate government [hukumat] (p. 4).

On all these points see Chapter 2.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 14



One full page (5) is on Miss Fatima Jinnah. One full page (6) is on Iqbal,
where it is said that he, together with Jinnah [sath mil kar], did much for
the creation of Pakistan.

The rest of the book is on Muslim children, fruits and vegetables, our
food, animals, means of transport, dresses, mountains and rivers, and
good habits.

Mu'ashrati Ulum by M. H. Qadri, Shakil Brothers. Karachi. n.d., pp. 32.

The Quaid-i-Azam received his higher [a'ala] education in London. His
mazar is guarded by the Pakistan Army day and night (p. 15).

See Chapter 2 for correction.

For the services rendered by Liaquat Ali Khan the nation gave him the
title of Quaid-i-Millat and Shaheed-i-Millat. The "title" is in the singular (p.
17).

The point has been covered above in full detail.

Iqbal went to London for higher education, and after that received his
doctorate in Germany. He was the first to present the concept of the
creation of Pakistan (p. 18).

Both the statements on Iqbal are discussed fully in Chapter 2.

Class 3

Mu'ashrati Ulum: District Lahore, Punjab Textbook Board, Lahore, 5th
reprint, March 1989, pp. 76. Authors: Professor Dr. Miss Mariam K. Ilahi,
Dr. Miss Firoza Yasmin, Sahibzada Abdur Rasul, Mrs. Nuzhat Mansur,
Maqbul Anwar Daudi, Ali Shabbar Kazmi and Bashiruddin Malik. Editor:
Bashiruddin Malik. Supervisors: Hifsa Javed, Sibt-i-Hasan and
Shahnawaz. Prepared by the Punjab Textbook Board and prescribed as the
sole [or civil; in Urdu both words are written identically] textbook for the
schools of district Lahore. Print order: 80,000 Copies.

"Raja Jaipal tried to enter the country of Mahmud Ghaznawi. Upon this, Mahmud
Ghaznawi defeated Raja Jaipal, captured Lahore, and established an Islamic
government [hakumat]" (p.8).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 15



Does this explanation of Mahmud Ghaznawi's invasion also justify his repeated
incursions into India and unprovoked pillage of Hindu places of worship? The Punjab
under his rule was not an Islamic state.

Two pages on Jesus Christ do not mention the fact that he founded Christianity (pp. 70-
71).

The last lesson on the "Important Personality of Our District" is in praise of Shaikh Ali
Hujweri alias Data Ganj Bakhsh. Tomb worship is thus made a part of instruction at a
very early stage (pp. 75-76).

Out of 21 lessons, one is on the history of the district of Lahore, 15 on geography,
economics and administration, and 5 on Adam, Abraham, Jesus Christ, the Prophet of
Islam, and Data Ganj Bakhsh. Hujveri, popularly known as Data Ganj Bakhsh, is thus
firmly and unmistakably placed among the prophets. Probably a majority of Muslim
students will believe that Hujveri was a prophet, and this farcical addition to their
knowledge of Islam will become a part of their belief.

Mu'ashrati Ulum: District Peshawar, NWFP Textbook Board, Peshawar, n.d., pp. 56.
Authors: Professor Alauddin Khilji, College of Education, University of Peshawar
(History Section), and Wali Muhammad, Lecturer, Islamia College, Peshawar
(Geography Section). Revised and edited by Dr. Mumtaz Mangalori and Muhammad
Halim, subject specialists at the Board. Print order. 10,000 copies.

"When the Quaid-i-Azam set out on his campaign to win an independent Islamic
country the people of NWFP joined him"(p. 5). There is no mention of the Red Shirts
who were in power in the province till August 1947.

Lesson No. 16 on Moses (pp. 50-51) does not mention the fact that he founded Judaism;
nor does Lesson No. I7 on Jesus Christ (pp. 52-53) mention Christianity.

The last Lesson is on Sardar Abdur Rab Nishtar, who thus finds himself in the company
of Adam, Abraham, Moses, Christ and Prophet Muhammad (p. 56).

Thus, while the students of Lahore are liable to reckon up Hujveri in the list of
prophets, those of Peshawar are faced with a more formidable task — that of accepting
Sardar Abdur Rab Nishtar as wearing the nimbus of a prophet

There are about 2 pages out of 56 of what could be called history.

Mu'ashrati Ulum: Karachi, Sindh Textbook Board, Jamshoro, September 1989, pp. 76.
Authors: Fida Husain Khokhar and M. F. Harald. Revised by Allauddin Khalid.
Advisor: Abdul Majid Abbassi. Print order, 10,000 copies.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 16



"Our homeland is green and fertile" (p. 5).

That is all that the book has to say about the history (?) of the country.

The personality in the book is Haji Abdullah Haroon (pp. 715-76), who thus is bracketed
with Adam, Abraham, Moses, Christ and the Prophet of Islam.

Class 4

Mu'ashrati Ulum, NWFP Textbook Bound, Peshawar, n.d., pp. 92. Authors:
Muthar Hashmi, Jahanzeb College, Saidu Sharif, Swat; Wali Muhammad,
Islamia College, Peshawar; Muhammad Yaqub, Islamia College,
Peshawar, Professor Muhammad Raza Khan, Dera Ismail Khan; Ghulam
Hasan Baloch, D.I.S. [what does that stand for?], Dera Ismail Khan;
Sayyud Muhammad Ali Shah, former Principal, Training School, Dera
Ismail Khan; and Muhammaid Zubair Mangalori, Research Officer,
Textbook Board, Peshawar. Revised and edited by Dr. Mumtaz Mangalori
and Muhammad Halim, of the Textbook Board. Print order: 65,000 copies.

"The Muslims treated the non-Muslims very well [when they ruled the province]. Yet
the non-Muslims nursed in their hearts an enmity against the Muslims. When the
British invaded the area [ilaqa] the non-Muslims sided with them and against the
Muslims. So the British conquered the whole country (p. 16).

According to the 1881 census of the NWFP, out of every 10,000 persons 9,184 were
Muslims; when the British conquered the area some years earlier this proportion would
have been even greater. Thus the number of non-Muslims in the population of the area
at the time of British advent was infinitesimal. The Pathan is by definition a Muslim,
like the Turk. The non-Muslims of the territory were Hindu and Sikh migrants engaged
in business and commerce. They were not a martial class. Did this tiny community of
money-makers fight on the side of the British with such desperate velour as to decide
the final outcome? We have no evidence of such a thing having taken place. I suspect
that this accusation against the non-Muslims has been made with a view to offering a
pretext for the Pathan defeat: the Pathans would not have been vanquished but for the
treachery and machinations of the non-Muslims group. This is an unacceptable excuse
and bad history. The British not only beat the Pathans but also recruited the Maliks of
the tribal territory to their payroll in exchange for loyalty to the new masters and a firm
promise to keep the peace in the wild belt bordering on Afghanistan.

"The Hindus wanted to control the government of India after independence. The British
sided with the Hindus. But the (Muslims did not accept this decision. Allama Iqbal and
Quaid-i-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah said that a Muslim government should be

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 17



established in the areas where the Muslims constituted the majority of the population
.... The Pakistan Resolution was adopted on 23 March 1940 in a big meeting of the
Muslim League in Lahore. In 1946, before the creation of Pakistan, when the people of
NWFP were asked their opinion all of them voted in favor of Pakistan" (p. 17).

To say that "the British sided with the Hindus" is only a half truth. Iqbal and Jinnah
were not the only persons who asked for a Muslim state nor, in chronological terms,
were they the earliest to make the demand. Iqbal argued for separation in 1937 and
Jinnah in 1940. Dozens of people had suggested a solution by partition long before this.
The Lahore Resolution was adopted on 24 (March, not 23, and by the annual session of
the All India Muslim League, not by "a big meeting of the Muslim League". In 1946 all
the people of NWFP did not vote for Pakistan. For fuller details on all these points see
Chapter 2.

There are only 2 pages out of 92 on history (pp. 16-17).

The last 9 Lessons are on the Prophet of Islam, the four "righteous" khalifas, Sayyid
Ahmad Barelawi, Hazrat Pir Baba, Malik Khuda Bakssh, and Jinnah.

On Jinnah we are told that in England he earned a superior or high degree in law, that
he became a "political worker" of the Indian National Congress in 1906, and then
(jumping over all the intervening years) in 1934 he returned to India from England. It is
repeated that the Pakistan Resolution was passed on 23 March in a big Muslim League
meeting in Lahore (pp. 90-91).

Jinnah did not earn a superior or high degree in law in England; in fact, he did not get
any degree of any kind in any subject from any country. The date of the adoption of the
Lahore Resolution should read 24, not 23, March. Both these points are treated in detail
in Chapter 2.

Mu'ashrati Ulum, Punjab Textbook Board, Lahore, 2nd. ed. April 1989, pp. 104. Authors:
Dr. Mrs. Firoza Yasmin. Dr. Athar Hameed, Bashiruddin Malik, and Qazi Sajjad
Ahmad. Editors: Dr. Mrs. Firoza Yasmin and Bashiruddin Malik. Supervisors: Hifsa
Javed, Shahnawaz and Sibt-i-Hasan.

One lesson, No.12 (pp. 67-74), is on history. It begins with the invasion of Muhammad
bin Qasim, attacks the Hindu religion, and describes the Muslim advent as a visit
("when the Muslims came to the subcontinent") but the British arrival as a forcible
seizure of power from the Muslims; we are told that "on 23 March 1940 Jinnah held a
meeting in Lahore and explained to the Muslims (ye bat samjhai) his idea of having a
separate homeland for them, and they were very happy about it and promised to help
him;" and finally, about the 1965 war with India, it is said that "at last, frightened [dar
kar] of the Pak Army and the people of Pakistan, Bharat sued for peace".

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 18



The date 23 March is wrong. The reference to the 1965 war is groundless. See Chapter 2.

The last 8 Lessons are on the Prophet of Islam, the four first khalifas, Jinnah, Iqbal and
Major Aziz Bhatti. On Iqbal, it is said that he went to England for higher studies;
Germany is not mentioned.

Mu'ashrati Ulum, Sindh Textbook Board, Jamshoro, 2nd. ed., April 1989, pp. 80.
Authors: Abdul Majid Abbasi, M.A., B.T., M.Ed., Mirza lshaq Baig, M.A., M.Ed., LL.B.,
and Sayyid Talmiz Hasnain Rizvi, M.A., B.Ed. (Gold Medallist). Chief Editor Abdul
Majid Abbasi. Print order 25,000 copies.

"During the British rule all the Muslims of South Asia joined to form a political party,
the All India Muslim League. The object of this party was to win independence from the
British and to create a separate country, Pakistan, for the Muslims" (p. 1).

It is natural to infer from this garbled account of the foundation of the All India Muslim
League that it aimed in 1906 at winning independence and creating a Pakistan. In 1906
it only promised to be loyal to the British government, to protect Muslim interests, and
to make friends with the non-Muslims.

"The Pakistan Resolution was passed on 23 March 1940' (p. 2).

23 March should read 24 March.

As soon as the partition of India took place "many Muslims began to migrate from the
Hindu-majority areas to Pakistan" (p. 2).

"Many" Muslims from the Hindu provinces did not migrate to Pakistan. A very small
minority came over from Delhi, the United provinces and Bihar, a tiny trickle from
Bombay and the Central Provinces; and a few hundred families from South India. Had
"many" Muslims left India for Pakistan the India of today would not have a Muslim
population exceeding that of Pakistan.

In the section on Radio Pakistan, the student is not told that it is a department of the
government (pp. 48-49). Chapter 12 (pp. 62-67) deals with the problems of the province
of Sindh, but the ethnic question is not mentioned.

Jinnah went to England for higher education and passed the law examination after four
years (p. 77).

He was called to the bar. See Chapter 2.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 19



The Pakistan Resolution was passed on 23 March 1940 in Lahore (p. 77).

As noted above, the date should be 24 March. The reader should look up the accurate
and exact programme of the Muslim League Lahore session in Chapter 2 below.

The personalities of Sindh whose lives are sketched in the book are Sir Ghulam Husain
Hadayatullah, Abdullah Haroon and Hyder Bakhsh Jatoi (pp. 78-80).

Secondary Level: Urdu Medium
Class 5

Mu'arshrati Ulum, NWFP Textbook Board, Peshawar, n.d., pp. 119.
Authors: Abdur Rauf Faruqi, Government Jahanzeb College, Saidu Sharif
(Convener); Muhammad Ali Shah, Principal, Training School, Dera Ismail
Khan; Mahmud Ahmad Tariq, Government College, Mandan; Dilasa
Khan Murawwat, Principal, Jami High School, Bannu; and Sufi Ghulam
Muhammad, Headmaster, Government High School, Akbarpura. Editor:
Dr. Mumtaz Mangalori, Senior Subject Specialist, Textbook Board.
Revised by Muhammad Halim, Subject Specialist, Textbook Board. Print
order: 55,000 copies.

There are 11 pages of history at the opening of the book under 4 headings: Differences
in Muslim and Hindu Civilizations, Need for the Creation of an Independent State, The
Ideology of Pakistan, and India's Evil Designs against Pakistan. The three-quarters of a
page essay on Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan has no dates, but asserts that he declared that
"the Muslims should organize themselves as a separate nation" (p. 7). Iqbal was the first
person to present to the nation the idea of Pakistan in 1930, and his suggestion was to
create an "independent and free" state made up of "all those areas where the Muslims
are in majority" (p. 7). The 1971 break-up of the country is dismissed in a atrociously
distorted lines: "India engineered riots in East Pakistan through her agents and then
invaded it from all four sides. Thus Pakistan was forced to fight another war with India.
This war lasted two weeks. After that East Pakistan seceded and became Bangladesh"
(P. 11).

On Iqbal's 1930 address and the 1971 war see Chapter 2.

In the Lesson on political administration, two sentences merit notice. "When the 1956
Constitution was made, it had still not become operative when it was abrogated"; "in
1971, the task of making a constitution was given to the constitution-making committee
of the country, and this committee unanimously approved a constitution in April 1973"
(p. 70).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 20



The 1956 constitution was operative from 23 March 1956 to 7 October 1958. The making
of the 1973 constitution did not start in 1971 but in 1972.

The last 13 Lessons are hagiographic essays on Khadijat-ul-Kubra, Fatima-az-Zahra,
Imam Husain, Muhammad bin Qasim, Mahmud Ghannawi, Aurangzeb Alamgir, Shah
Walliullah, Sultan Tipu, Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Jamaluddin Afghani, Ubaidullah Sindhi,
Iqbal and Jinnah (pp. 98-119). There is no mention on how Aurangzeb ascended the
throne (p. 106). Jamaluddin "Afghani" is said to have belonged to Afghanistan (p. 112)
and to have advocated pan-Islamism and world unity of Muslims without distinction of
country or nation (pp. 112-113). The one-page essay on Ubaidullah Sindhi does not
contain a single date (p. 114) (the student might well consider him an 18th-century
figure). To Iqbal are attributed wrong views and wrong education, he was the first to
offer the idea of Pakistan which aimed at "creating a separate independent Muslim
hakumat wherever the Muslims were in a majority"; he took "his doctorate in philosophy
from England" and along with it a "degree in barrister" (p. 115); he "wrote letters to
Jinnah when the latter was in England asking him to return to India and lead the
nation" (p. 116). In the essay on Jinnah, the Lahore Resolution is said to have been
adopted on 23 March 1940 and to have demanded "an independent saltanat" (p. 116-
117).

On Jamaluddin "Afghani", Iqbal's foreign education and his 1930 address, and be
contents of the Lahore Resolution see Chapter 2. Iqbal wrote no letters to Jinnah when
the latter was in England asking him to return to India.

Mu'ashrati Ulum, Punjab Textbook Board, Lahore, 3rd. reprint. March 1989, pp. 112.
Authors: Dr. Firoza Yasmin, Mrs. Zarin Ashraf and Bashiruddin Malik. Editor.
Bashiruddin Malik. Supervisor: Sibt-i-Hasan. Print order: 127,000 copies.

Lesson No. 17 (pp. 85-93) is entitled "History". The word invasion is avoided
scrupulously in the case of all Muslim conquerors from Muhammad bin Qasim to
Ahmad Shah Abdali (p. 88). The British advent is described picturesquely: "In the
beginning, the British purchased cotton cloth from the subcontinent and sold it in
Britain. So they came here for the purpose of trade. Gradually they noticed the
weakened state of the Muslim government and thought of taking over its territories ....
To achieve this they made the Hindus join them, and the Hindus were very glad to side
with the British" (pp. 88-89). The British rule gets a sharp and short shrift: "After
capturing the subcontinent the British began, on the one hand, to loot to their heart's
content all the things produced in this area and, on the other, in conjunction with the
Hindus, to greatly suppress the Muslims" (p. 89).

In the same chapter wars with India are mentioned in patriotic not historical terms. In
1965, "the Pakistan Army conquered several areas of India, and when India was on the
point of being defeated she requested the United Nations to arrange a cease-fire ... After

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 21



the 1965 war, India, with the help of the Hindus living in East Pakistan, instigated the
people living there against the people of West Pakistan, and at last in December 1971
herself invaded East Pakistan. The conspiracy resulted in the separation of East
Pakistan from us. All of us should receive military training and be prepared to fight the
enemy" (p. 93).

For the Indo-Pakistan wars of 1965 and 1971 see Chapter 2.

The last 12 Lessons (pp. 94-112) treat with the same personalities as are included in the
NWFP textbook for the same class (see above), with two changes: Aurangzeb is
replaced by Ahmad Shah Abdali and Sultan Tipu is omitted.

Mu'shrati Ulum, Sindh Textbook Board, Jamshoro, 1st. ed., February 1989, pp. 132.
Author S. Hamid Ali Jafri. Editors: Dr. Muhammad Saleh Shah Bukhari and Abdul
Majid Abbasi. Print order: 80,000 copies.

"There was nothing common in religion, ways of living and customs and rites between
the two nations", the Hindus and the Muslims (p. 6). "In 1857 the people of South Asia
joined together to fight the British in order to win their independence; and this war is
called the War of Independence" (p. 6). "Iqbal was the first to present to the nation the
idea of Pakistan. In 1930 he demanded that an independent state should be created in
all the areas of South Asia where the Muslims were in a majority" (p. 8). On the 1971
events: "Bharat engineered riots on a large scale through her agents and some
mischievous people. Later, she attacked East Pakistan from four sides, and thus
Pakistan had to fight a war with Bharat. This war lasted three weeks, and after that East
Pakistan separated and became Bangladesh" (p. 11).

In Lesson No. 9 there are two pages on the armed forces of Pakistan (pp. 58-60). "At last
when in 1956 a constitution was made for the country it never came into operation, and
General Ayub Khan took over the government and put an end to this constitution" (p.
65). In later developments there is no mention of General Yahya Khan and his rule.
Similarly, in the lesson on the administration of the country there is no mention of the
coup of 1977 and of the Martial Law that followed for 11 years (pp. 65-69).

Jamaluddin Afghani was born in a village near Jalalabad in Afghanistan (p. 104). Iqbal
was the first person to present the idea of Pakistan. He earned the degrees of Doctor of
Philosophy and "Barristery" from Germany and England. In 1930 he demanded that all
the Muslim-majority areas of South Asia should be combined and a free Muslim
government should be established there. He wrote letters to Jinnah who was then in
England, requesting him to return to South Asia and lead the Muslims (pp. 108-109).
The Muslim League session of 1940 held in Lahore demanded a separate independent
state in South Asia for the Muslims (pp. 110-111).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 22



All the statements made above are corrected in Chapter 2.

Mu'asrati Ulum, West Pakistan Textbook Board, Lahore, ed.. April 1969. pp. 160.
Author: Muhammad Abdul Aziz, A. (Alig.), M.A. (London). Ph.D. (Indiana). West
Pakistan Education Service (Senior). Director West Pakistan Bureau of Education.
Lahore. The title page says it is published for the Board by Qaumi Kutab Khana,
Lahore; the outside from cover says it is published for the Board by Pakistan Book
Store, Lahore. Print order: 73,000 copies.

Part 1 (pp. 9-82) is entitled "History" and has 13 chapters or lessons: Hazrat Khadija,
Hazrat Imam Husain, Muhammad bin Qasim. Hazrat Data Ganj Bakhsh. Shah Jalal
Sylheti. Khushhal Khan Khattak, Shah Abdul Latil Bhitai, Nawab Salimullah Khan,
Field Marshal Muhammad Ayub Khan. Chchamb and Jawrian Front. Sialkot Front,
Pakistan Day, and Independence Day. The essays on Ganj Bakhsh, Jalal Sylheti and
Bhitai don't give any dates at all, not even their centuries. On Slimullah Khan it is
considered very important to mention that he received the title of Nawab Bahadur in
1903 (p. 44). The British divided Bengal in 1901 (p. 45) into "East Bengal and West
Bengal" (p. 45).

The partition of Bengal was effected in 1905, not 1901; and the new provinces were not
called East Bengal and West Bengal, but Eastern Bengal-and-Assam and Bengal.

The personality of Ayub Khan pervades the whole book. He is introduced as a person
whom "everyone loves" for his piety and virtuous deeds (pp. 52-53). His ascension to
power is explained in four delightful lines: "The system [intiazam] worked well in the
early years after the creation of Pakistan. But gradually a few things went wrong
[kuchch kharabian paida ho gain]. Black-market flourished in the country. Corruption
became rampant. On this [is par] martial law was imposed in 1958" (p. 53). There is no
reference to the political situation of the country.

The "revolution" [inqilab] brought about by Ayub wins the authors unqualified praise.
"After the 1958 revolution new kinds of schools and universities were established. The
number of factories increased very much. Thus the conditions [halat] of our country
underwent a change (p. 54). The achievements of the Field Marshal's rule receive a fatal
testimonial: "In order to refresh the memory of this revolution we celebrate the
Revolution Day on the 27th of October every year. On this day there is a holiday in the
entire country, and at night the buildings are lit up" (p. 54).

Chapters 10 and 11 (pp. 56-75) are detailed descriptions of the fighting on two fronts in
the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war which amount to a glowing account of the Pakistan Army's
achievements and feats of arms. Chapters 24 and 25 (pp. 147-160) of Part II (Geography)
explain the working of basic democracies. Thus, in all, Ayub and his government have
five chapters to themselves.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 23



On the Lahore Resolution there are three factual errors on two pages (pp. 76-77): it was
passed on "23 March", it was "adopted by the Muslims" (read Muslim League for the
Muslims), and it demanded "a separate country". For correction of these errors see
below Chapter 2.

Pakistan is said to have been created on 14 August 1947 (pp. 79-80). For the correct date
see Chapter 2.

The real gem of the book appears on p. 139 in the Chapter on India, where it is stated
that "previously it was a part of our country". Was Pakistan a part of India before 1947,
or India a part of Pakistan? The author and the Textbook Board alone can answer this
question.

The outer cover-cum-title page informs us that this book, though written in Urdu, is also
prescribed for the English medium schools.

Class 6

Mu'ashrati Ulum, NWFP Textbook Board, Peshawar, n.d., pp. 81. Authors
of the History Section: Professor Alauddin Khilji, College of Education,
Peshawar, Latif Mir, Chief Instructor, Education Extension Centre,
Abbotabad; and Abdur Rauf Famqi, Jahanzeb College, Saidu Sharif.
Author of Geography Section: Karamat Ali Shah, University Public
School, University of Peshawar. Revised and edited by Professor
Israruddin, Head of the Department of Geography, University of
Peshawar, and Muhammad Halim, Subject Specialist, NWFP Textbook
Board. Print order: 70,000 copies.

Chapters 6-8 deal with Ancient Civilization of South Asia (pp. 47-54). the Advent of the
Muslims in South Asia (pp. 55-63), and British Rule over South Asia and the Pakistan
Movement (pp. 6472).

Some statements: "In 1857 the British imprisoned the last Mughal King, Bahadur Shah
Zafar, and put an end to the Mughal monarchy" (p. 59). "Gradually, Urdu made so
much progress that it became the spoken language of the entire South Asia" (p. 61). In
northern South Asia the Hindu and Muslim dress was "nearly identical" (p. 61).
"Besides King Akbar, some other Mughal princes also married the daughters of Hindu
Rajas" (p. 62). The 1857 revolt was the "War of Independence" (p. 69). In the post-1857
period, "Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Allama Iqbal and other Muslim leaders began to
underline the necessity of a separate state [mamlakat] for the Muslims" (pp. 71-72).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 24



On the 1857 events and the importance of the Urdu language see Chapter 2. Sir Sayyid
Ahmad Khan did not even mention the possibility of a separate state for the Muslims,
far from having underlined its necessity.

Mu'ashrati Ulum, Punjab Textbook Board, Lahore, 8th. Reprint, March 1989, pp. 80.
Authors: Dr. Hasan Askari Rizvi, Nighat Naheed, Muhammad Umar and Hifsa Javed.
Editors: Sahibzada Abdur Rasul and Hifsa Javed. Supervisor: Hifsa Javed. Print order:
145,000 copics.

The last 3 Chapters deal with history: The People of the Subcontinent in the Pre-Muslim
Age (pp. 58-62), The Advent of Islam in the Subcontinent (pp. 63-70), and The Advent of
the British in the Subcontinent (pp. 71-80).

Some statements: "The inhabitants of the subcontinent were fed up with British
misdeeds. In 1857 they made an armed attempt to drive out the British and to restore
the freedom of the subcontinent" (p. 76); the section is headed "War of Independence,
1857". "In 1885 the Hindus founded their own political party, the Indian National
Congress' (p. 79). "In 1940 the Muslim League passed the Pakistan Resolution in
Lahore" demanding "a separate free homeland" (p. 80).

In 1857 the "inhabitants of the subcontinent" did not make a bid for freedom, only a
very small minority was involved in the uprising; nor was it a War of Independence.
The Indian National Congress was not founded by the Hindus alone. The Lahore
Resolution did not demand "a separate free homeland" but "independent states". Full
details of the corrections are in Chapter.

Mu'ashrati Ulum, Sindh Textbook Board, Jamshoro, 1st. ed., January 1989, pp. 104.
Author: Edgar Victor. Print order: 90,000 copies

Some statements: "Living in one place the Hindus and the Muslims came very near to
each other" (p. 86). "Muslim dress influenced the Hindus, and in a short time in South
Asia the dress of the Hindus and the Muslims became almost identical" (p. 87). "Muslim
food and cuisine became popular in every household ... The Hindus adopted the Islamic
ways of furnishing and decorating their homes" (p. 90). The revolt of 1857 is called the
"War of Independence" (pp. 99-100). "Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Alama Iqbal, Hasrat
Mohani and other Muslim leaders began to emphasize the necessity of having a
separate, free and independent state [mamlikat] for the Muslims" (pp. 102-103). The
Pakistan Resolution said that "all the Muslim-majority areas of South Asia should be
combined to create a free and independent state which should carry the name of
Pakistan" (p. 103).

If the Hindus and the Muslims "came very near to each other" and their dress, food,
houses and ways of living became identical, why did the Muslims later harp upon their

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 25



separate identity and nationalism and still later demand a state of their own? How did
one culture and one civilization and a composite nationalism produce the Hindu-
Muslim problem? The revolt of 1857 was not a War of Independence but a mutiny
which developed into a resurrection. Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan never emphasized the
necessity of having a separate state for the Muslims; he did not even drop a hint about
it. The Lahore Resolution neither demanded one state (it used the phrase "independent
states") nor gave it the name of Pakistan. See Chapter 2 below.

Mu'ashrati Ulum (Tarikh wa Shahriat), West Pakistan Textbook Board, Lahore, 1st. ed.,
March 1968. pp. 184. Author: Abdul Ghafur Chaudhri, B.A. (Hon's.) (London), M.A.,
M.Sc. (Alig.), Senior Editor, West Pakistan Textbook Board. Nazar Sani (editing,
revising or supervising) by Dr. Abdul Hamid, M.A., Ph.D., Head of the Department of
History, University of the Punjab, Lahore. Published for the Board by Kutab Khana
Anjuman-i-Hamayat-i-Islam, Lahore. Print order: 170.000 copies. (The back outer cover
says that it is the 4th edition published in March 1969 with a print order of 120,000. One
does not know which statement to take as the correct one).

There are three parts to the book: History of India and Pakistan (pp.1-114), History of
Islam (pp. 115-162), and Civics (pp. 163- 184).

Shah Waliullah and Sayyid Ahmad Barelawi are mentioned (pp. 74-77), but
contemporary Muslim developments in Bengal and elsewhere are omitted. The revolt of
1857 is called the "War of Independence" and those who fought in it "majahidin" (pp. 77-
81). The Aligarh movement (pp. 83-86) and the Deoband school (pp. 86-87) receive
adequate attention, but again Muslim Bengal is neglected.

"In 1885 the Hindus founded the Congress" (p. 85). "In 1885 an Englishman, Mr. Hume,
founded the Indian National Congress" (p. 88). Now, both these statements cannot be
correct. Hume was not a Hindu Englishman. In fact, neither of the assertions is true.
The Congress was established neither by the Hindus (there were Muslims and Parsis in
the gathering) not by Hume (though Hume favored its emergence).

In 1930 Iqbal suggested that "the areas with a Muslim majority should be separated
from the other provinces of India and made into an independent state in which
Muslims are not only able to govern according to their own will [this sounds silly, but it
is an exact translation of apni marzi se hakumat kar saken] but also promote Islamic
civilization and culture" (p. 102). Iqbal said nothing of the sort in 1930; for full details of
what he said see Chapter 2.

The "Pakistan Resolution" was passed "in March 1940", and it asked for the creation of
"an independent Muslim State" (pp. 104-105). The resolution is given a wrong name; it
should be Lahore Resolution. The exact date of its adoption is not provided: 24 March.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 26



The resolution did not demand one state but "states". I have discussed these vulgar
errors in Chapter 2.

At the Simla Conference of 1945 the "Congress leaders claimed that their party alone
represents the whole of India and [said] that the Muslim League has no right to [claim
to] be a representative of the Muslims" (pp. 106-107) (I have tried in my translation to
make some sense out of the original obtuse Urdu). This is a dishonest version of what
the Congress said. It only denied the Muslim League's claim to represent ail the
Muslims of India, pointed out its own Muslim membership, enumerated all other
Muslim parties which did not support the League, and refused to accept the League's
condition that it alone would nominate, and had the right to nominate, all the Muslim
members of the planned Viceroy's Executive Council.

"The subcontinent was divided into two parts on 14 August 1947" (p. 109). For the
inaccuracy of this statement see Chapter 2.

On the communal riots of 1947 the book is blatantly partial, mentioning only Hindu and
Sikh massacres of "unarmed Muslims", and giving the impression that the Muslims did
not even fight back in self-defence (p. 110).

In the 1965 war India "suffered great losses" and "her casualties (dead, not just
wounded) were ten times those of Pakistan" (pp. 158-159). This is a poor likeness to
truth. It should also be noted that the chapter on the 1965 war is included in the part on
the "History of Islam", not in the one on "History of India and Pakistan", and is placed
immediately after the three chapters on the Umayyads. What will the student make of
this?

The last chapter of the book (pp. 176-184) is in praise of basic democracies.

Two further weaknesses of the book should be noted. It makes no reference at all to
such important institutions and developments as the All India Muslim Conference and
the negotiations at the Round Table Conferences. It completely ignores Muslim Bengal's
political and intellectual evolution.

Mu'ashrati Ulum, Punjab Textbook Board, Lahore, 1st. experimental edition, second
reprint, March 1984, pp. 97. Authors: Bashiruddin Malik, Muhammad Aslam, Azhar
Hameed and Abdul Qadeer. Editor: Bashiruddin Malik. Supervisers: Mrs. Hifsa Sayed
and Sibt-i-Hasan. Published for the Board by Kutab Khana Anjuman-i-Hamayat-i-
Islam, Lahore. Print order: 30,000 copies.

The "experimental" edition lasted a long time, because it carries a notification of
approval of the Government of the Punjab dated 20 November 1974.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 27



Professor Nazir Ahmad Awan, Chairman of the Punjab Textbook Board, issues a
warning (called "appeal" in Urdu) on the inside front cover that "you are not obliged to
buy any books additional to the Board's publications; if you are forced to do this, you
should inform the undersigned". It is not clear whether "you" stands for the teacher, or
the student.

In their preface the authors spell out the objective of the book: "Social Studies have been
given special importance in the educational policy [of the Government] so that
Pakistan's basic ideology assumes the shape of a way of life, its practical enforcement is
assured, the concept of social uniformity adopts a practical form and the whole
personality of the individual is developed" (literal translation). Presumably these goals
have determined the contents of the book: the Muslim World. There are only a few
scattered reference to Pakistan, but even these are muddle-headed, inadequate and
misleading.

On the 1971 break-up of Pakistan: "Right from the time of the creation of Pakistan some
enemy countries were bent upon separating East Pakistan from West Pakistan. The
machinations of such countries bore fruit in 1971, and East Pakistan was separated from
the other part of the country and was given the name of Bangladesh" (p. 78). This is the
complete and exhaustive description of the crisis in three lines. For my corrective
commentary see Chapter 2.

Chapter II (pp. 81-90) contains a few biographies, like those of Jamaluddin "Afghani",
Muhammad Ali Jauhar, Iqbal and Jinnah. None of them carries any dates or years. In
Jamaluddin's case (pp. 81-82) his visit to India is not mentioned. The 10-line note on
Iqbal tells us that he "presented the idea of a separate homeland for the Muslims in 1930
in his presidential address at the annual session of the Muslim League held in
Allahabad" (p. 86), which is a mockery of the truth. See Chapter 2.

Class 7

Mu'ashrati Ulum, NWFP Textbook Board, Peshawar, n.d., pp. 81. Authors:
Professor Dr. Muhammad Nazir Kakakhel, Government College,
Nowshehra, and Professor Muhammad Nisar, Government College,
Mardan. Revised and edited by Professor Israruddin, Head of the
Department of Geography, University of Peshawar, and Muhammad
Halim, Subject Specialist, NWFP Textbook Board. Print order: 10.000
copies.

Chapter 1-4 (pp. 1-42) deal with the Muslim world, but not with its history. Jamaluddin
Afghani is "said to have been born" in Afghanistan (p.31) which was "his real home" (p.
32). See my correction in Chapter 2.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 28



Only 4 pages (35-38) are spared for Indian Muslim history, and that is done by way of 3
essays on Muhammad Ali Jauhar, Iqbal and Jinnah. On Muhammad Ali, them is no
reference al all to his career in the Congress. On Iqbal, we are told that he earned "the
degrees of Barristery and of doctorate in philosophy from England" and that in 1930 he
demanded "a separate Islamic State". On Jinnah, we are informed that at the age of 16 he
"left for England to work for a degree in law", and that it was under his presidentship
that the Muslim League passed a resolution in 1940 "demanding a separate homeland"
for the Muslims of India. All these mistakes are corrected in Chapter 2.

Mu'ashrati Ulum, Shaikh Sirajuddin and Sons, Lahore, for the Punjab Textbook Board,
10th reprint, March 1989. pp. 74. Authors: Dr. Hasan Askari Rizvi and Nighat Naheed.
Editors: Sayyid Masud Raza and Sibt-i-Hasan. Supervisor: Mrs. Hifsa Javed. Prepared
by the Punjab Textbook Board. Print order: 146,000 copies.

The first 4 Chapters (pp. 1-34) follow the order, organization, titles and contents of the
book published by the NWFP Textbook Board (see above), but make two additional
mistakes: Muhammad Ali Jauhar "received his higher education at Oxford, as a result of
which he was given the degree of honors" (p.26; the subject is not mentioned); in
England Iqbal, in collaboration with Sayyid Ameer Ali, organized the London Muslim
League (p. 28). On the London Muslim League see below, Chapter 2.

Mu'ashrati Ulum, Sindh Textbook Board, Jamshoro, 1st. ed., February 1989, pp.114.
Author: Sayyid Humid Ali Jafri. Print order: 90,000 copies.

Some statements: "Sayyid Jamaluddin Afghani was born in 1838 in a village called
Sadabad in Afghanistan" (p. 50). Iqbal received the "degrees" of Ph.D. and "Barristery";
"he gave to the Muslims of South Asia the idea of establishing an independent
government [hakumat] in the Muslim-majority areas" (p. 54); in March 1940 the Muslim
League, in the historic resolution passed by it, demanded "a separate independent
Islamic government [hakumat]" (p. 56).

Each of these statements is a foul-up. I deal with all of them in Chapter 2.

Mu'ashrati Ulum (Tarikh wa Shahriat), West Pakistan Textbook Board, Lahore, 3rd. ed.,
April 1969, pp.207. Author: Abdul Ghafur Chaudhri, B.A. (Hon's.) (London), M.A.,
M.Sc. (Alig.), Senior Editor, West Pakistan Textbook Board. Nazar Sani (editing,
revising or supervising) by Dr. M.D. Malik, M.A., Ph.D. (Washington), Professor,
Institute of Education and Research, University of the Punjab, Lahore. Published for the
Board by Qaumi Kutab Khana, Lahore. Print order: 55,000 copies.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 29



The book is divided into five parts: Freedom Movement of the Subcontinent (pp. 1-100),
History of Islam (pp. 101-129), Pakistan-India War (pp. 130-156), Civics (pp. 157-173),
and Government's Income and Expenditure (pp. 174-207).

Distortions and misreports abound:

On 1857: "This war was a holy war [jihad] waged by the Muslims against the English
government in which others also participated" (p. 20). In simpler language, the mutiny
was conceived, initiated and prosecuted by the Muslims as a religious duty but others,
that is the non-Muslims, also took part in it. It is not explained how and why the non-
Muslims became partners in a holy war. I discuss the events of 1857 in some detail in
Chapter 2.

Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan wrote a book in "the War of Independence" of 1857 (p. 31). He
did not. His book was entitled Rasala-i-Asbab-i-Baghawat-i-Hindh, Treatise on the Causes
of the Rebellion of India. Rebellion is far removed from a war of independence. In Urdu
vocabulary and usage baghawat is an act of illegality, contumacy and treason.

The "All India Congress was founded by an Englishman named Mr. Hume" (p. 31). It
was the Indian National Congress, not the All India Congress; and it was not founded
by Hume.

The Congress "enjoyed right from the start the patronage of the Government" (p. 31).
There is no evidence of this. If the Government of India and Lord Dufferin looked
kindly at its establishment, the same government and Lord Minto also looked with
benignance at the All India Muslim League on its birth and for some years after.

The Simla Deputation of 1906 asked for "separate electorates in elections to the councils"
(p. 38). That was only one of the issues raised by the Deputation. It also asked with
equal emphasis for weightage in all elected bodies, and this ought to have been
mentioned in the book.

The Lucknow Pact of 1916 is mentioned twice and in some detail (pp. 41, 46-47),
without referring to its disastrous results for the Muslims of Bengal and the Punjab. I
deal with this matter at some length in Chapter 2.

In 1930 Iqbal "demanded in clear terms that Muslims should establish their own
independent state and found a new mamlakat by merging the Punjab, Sarhad,
Baluchistan and Sindh" (p. 44). For what Iqbal actually said see below Chapter 2.

When a Hindu-Muslim agreement was not forthcoming at the Round Table Conference
"the British Government announced the new reforms in 1935 on its own initiative (apni
taraf se)" (p. 53). The presentation is warped by ignorance about the making of the

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 30



Government of India Act of 1935. It was only the Communal Award of 1932 which was
given by the British Prime Minister because the Hindu and Muslim delegates could not
agree on the quantum of seats for each community in the central and provincial
legislatures. The reforms came about as a result of a lengthy process of inquiries, high-
level talks, parleys, negotiations, exchange of views and discussions ranging in time
from the Indian tours of the Simon Commission in 1928 to the deliberations of the Joint
Select Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform in 1933. Throughout these years the
Indian leaders were in close touch with the British Government.

The Lahore Resolution demanded the creation of "two independent states in the
country" (p. 55). For correction see Chapter 2.

The Cripps Mission came to India in 1940 (p. 55). The year should be read as 1942.

"On 14 August 1947 the two new independent states called Pakistan and Hindustan
came into being" (p. 61). Read 15 August for 14 August. The name "Hindustan" was not
mentioned in the Indian Independence Act, nor has the post-1947 India ever called
herself by this name.

Four pages (pp. 163-67) are devoted to a description of the deteriorating political
conditions in Pakistan between 1947 and 1958 so that the student's mind is fully
prepared to accept as a blessing the imposition of martial law and the advent of Ayub
Khan's rule.

In 1960 Ayub Khan was elected President of the country and with this event
"democracy was restored in the country". Then "Ayub served the country with such
distinction that he was re-elected in 1965" (p. 68). By omitting any mention of the
restricted scope and value of basic democracies, the small size of the electoral college,
the growing anti-Ayub feeling in the country, the fact of Miss Fatima Jinnah's contesting
the presidency in 1965 with the backing of an all-parties alliance, and the far from
unanimous vote in favor of Ayub, the author has proved his loyalty as a civil servant
but held back vital information from the students.

One long chapter (pp. 69-100) on the Ayub administration and a separate part of the
book (p. 130-157) sing Ayub's praises as President, laud the achievements of the armed
forces in the 1965 war, and assert that the Pakistan Army "is counted among the best
armies of the world" (pp. 135-136).

Out of a total of 207 pages, 63 deal with the history of India and Pakistan up to 1958 and
29 with the history of Islam; the remaining 115 are allotted to Ayub Khan's reign.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 31



Class 8

Mu'ashrati Ulum, MWFP Textbook Board, Peshawar, n.d., pp. 96. Authors:
Professor Timur Khattak, Department of Geography, University of
Peshawar Professor Allauddin Khilji, M.A., College of Education,
University of Peshawar; and Professor Muhammad Nazir Kakakhel,
Govemment College, Nawshehra;. Revised and edited by Professor
Israruddini, Head of the Department of Geography, University of
Peshawar, and Muhammad Halim, Subject Specialist, NWFP Textbook
Board. Print order: 55.000 copies.

Chapters 8 and 9 (pp. 72-86) deal with the Indian history between 1857 and 1947. On the
1857 event: "the British gave in the name of mutiny and called their opponents 'rebels'.
But this war was the first united Indian effort [sic] against the British government. The
Muslims were in the forefront in this war. Granted that it did not result in the winning
of independence, but the failure produced a new zeal and enthusiasm in the hearts of
the Muslims, and as a result the state [mamlakat] of Pakistan came into existence in 1947"
(p. 73).

The thought of connecting the revolt of 1857 with the creation of Pakistan is a contrived
caricature the absurdity of which takes one's breath away. For 1857 see Chapter 2.

As a result of the 1937 elections "the provincial governments were formed by the
Congress or the Muslim League" (p. 77; the League came into power in only one
province). Mountbatten came to India as Governor General "in 1946" (p. 77). "The
decision to divide the subcontinent into two parts was taken on 14 August 1947" (p. 77).

Mountbatten took over as Viceroy of India in March 1947. The decision to divide India
was taken on 3 June; the decision was implemented on 15 August.

"The partition of Bengal was annulled in 1911 and the province of Bengal was reunited.
Now the Muslims realized that their political future could not be the same as the
Hindus and that if they had to assert their separate identity they must form a separate
party of their own" (p. 78; thus the Muslim League was formed after 1911). In 1930 Iqbal
suggested the creation of a "separate" Muslim "state" [manlakat] (p. 80). "After delivering
his Allahabad address Iqbal lived for only eight years; during this period he waged a
magnificent campaign in favor of creating such a separate mamlakat through his poetry,
speeches and personal correspondence" (p. 81). The "Pakistan" Resolution of "23 March
1940" demanded "one independent hakumat .... and one independent mamlakat in the
north-western and north-eastern areas with Muslim majorities'. (p. 83).

On Iqbal and the Lahore Resolution see Chapter 2.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 32



On the 1971 break-up of Pakistan: "The death of the Quaid-i-Azam was followed by
several political changes in Pakistan. Internal and external enemies used every method
to injure it. As a result of these enmities and conspiracies in 1971 East Pakistan
separated from us" (p. 86).

For a detailed discussion of the 1971 break-up see Chapter 2. Mu'ashrati Ulum, Punjab
Textbook Board, Lahore, 1st ed., March 1989, pp. 130. Authors: Qazi Abdul Qadeer, Dr.
Sarfaraz Husain Qazi, Dr. Azhar Hayseed, Professor Bashiruddin Malik, Professor
Ansar Husain, Munawwar ibn-i-Sidiq, Muhammad Shaft Mirza, Dr. Shahhaz Khan, and
Malik Amiruddin Ahsan. Editors: Nur Muhammad Malik, Sibt-i-Hasan and Mrs. Hifsa
Javed. Supervisor: Mrs. Hifsa Javed. Print order: 140,000 copies.

Chapters 8-10 (pp. 85-110) deal with the history of the years 1857-1947. The 1857 revolt
was "the war of independence" (p. 85). The object of the establishment of the Indian
National Congress was "to organize the Hindus politically" (p. 89). The Simla
Deputation of 1 October 1906 was "led by Nawab Muhsinul Mulk" (p. 90). "The Simon
Commission was boycotted by both the Congress and the Muslim League" (p. 96). "The
idea of the necessity for a separate homeland [watan] for the Muslims was a pretty old
one. Several Muslim leaders had hinted at it from time to time. But it's clear concept
was offered by Allama Iqbal in his Allahabad address of 1930. In 1933 Chaudhri
Rahmat Ali gave it the name of Pakistan" (p. 102).

The gaffes contained in all these statements are corrected below in Chapter 2.

Mu'ashrati Ulum, Sindh Textbook Board, Jamshoro, 2nd ed., May 1989, pp. 104. Authors:
Edgar Victor, Professor Dr. Muhammad Hasan Shaikh and Professor Muhammad
Rafique Dhanani. Print order: 10,000 copies.

Some statements: The events of 1857 were a "war of independence" (p. 81); "Allama
Iqbal is called the Philosopher of Pakistan because he offered the concept of Pakistan"
(p. 86); "through his poetry, speeches, and personal correspondence Iqbal struggled for
the creation of a separate state [mumlakat] for the Muslims" (p. 87); ''the Pakistan
Resolution of 23 March ... demanded a separate independent state" (p. 89); "after
Jinnah's death many political changes occurred in Pakistan, internal and external
enemies tried to damage the country in every possible way, and as a result of these
conspiracies East Pakistan separated from us in 1971 .... but now Pakistan has become
so strong that the Islamic countries consider it as the fortress of Islam, and God willing
soon Pakistan will be counted among the countries of the first rank in the world" (p. 92).

For correction of inaccuracies see Chapter 2. The declaration contained in the last
sentence about Pakistan being "the fortress of Islam" would have been derisive even if
made from the public platform of a third rate political party. Coming from three
professors in a textbook it is infuriating. Assuming that the professors believe in the

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 33



purity of the claim they are making, do they also know for certain that it will pass for
truth among the hundreds of teachers and thousands of students who would be reading
the book? Will the readers give faith to what the book says, or will they subscribe to
what they see with their own eyes happening around them? Or, are the professors
telling them that corruption, cheating, terrorism, exploitation, drug-traffic, arms-
smuggling, rape and looting are supreme Islamic virtues?

Classes 9-10

Mutala'a-i-Pakistan, Idara-i-Firogh-i-Ta'lim Peshawar, for the NWFP
Textbook Board, n.d., p. 198. Authors: Professor Dr. Muhammad Nazir
Kakakhel, Department of Political Science. University of Peshawar;
Professor Faizan Ahmed, Principal, Government Degree College, Kohat;
and Professor Nisar Muhammad Khan. Government Degree College,
Mardan. Revised and edited by Professor Dr. Muhammad Nazi:
Kakakhel, Department of Political Science. University of Peshawar, and
Muhammad Halim, Subject Specialist, NWFP Textbook Board. Prepared
by the NWFP Textbook Board. Prin: order: 40,000 copies.

Two Chapters deal with history: Islamic Society in South Asia (pp. 7-20) and The
Making of Pakistan (pp. 21-42). Statements in the latter: the 1857 events were a "war of
independence" (p. 21); the Indian National Congress is called "All India National
Congress" (p. 24); the Lucknow Pact of 1916 was a triumph for the Muslims (p. 26); in
1930 Iqbal clearly argued in favor of the two-nation theory and a "separate mamlakat" for
the Muslims of India (p. 31); the "Pakistan" Resolution, passed on 23 March 1940,
demanded "an independent and free Muslim state" (p. 34); as soon as independence
was declared in 1947 "Hindus and Sikhs started an unhindered (be daregh) massacre of
Muslims in India" (p. 40; there is no mention of the riots in Pakistan).

I have already noted all these illusions; they occur in nearly every book. They are
removed in Chapter 2.

Statements in the rest of the book are equally misleading. The 1971 break-up is
summarized in 7 lines thus: "As there were serious differences on the constitutional
issue between the two major parties the first session of the Assembly could not be
summoned. When the differences became grave [sangin] and the conditions in East
Pakistan went out of control, the Martial Law government took military action there
which resulted in civil war situation. Profiting from this state of affairs, India started a
military action [fauji karwai] against Pakistan. As a result of a war between the two
countries the Pakistan Army had to surrender on 16 December 1971, and East Pakistan,
sundered from Pakistan, became Bangladesh" (p. 51).

For the break-up of Pakistan see below Chapter 2.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 34



The 1977 coup is described and justified in 4 lines: "The Pakistan National Alliance
started a movement in favor of fresh elections which gradually fumed into the Tahrik-i-
Nizam-i-Mustafa. Exhaustive and prolonged talks began between the government and
the opposition, but when they produced no positive result and the state of law and
order deteriorated, the armed forces, under the leadership of General Muhammad Zia-
ul-Huq, took over the reins of power on 5 July 1977" (pp. 54-55). Zia's decision to
continue in power is defended in 3 lines: "It was announced that elections will be held
within 90 days and power handed over to the representatives of the masses, but the
elections scheduled to be held within 90 days were postponed for unavoidable reasons"
(p. 55).

See the sections on the Zia coup and the Zia years in Chapter 2.

Two examples of destoration of historical and contemporary facts from the Chapter on
culture:

"Before independence, Urdu was the language of the masses in the northern part of
South Asia, and it still is"; "in the modem period Urdu is making considerable progress
and books on all genres and subjects have been written in it"; "the roots of the national
language lie in the national traditions, values and thinking, and it reflects them. People
of all free countries feel a pride in talking in their own national language. Therefore, if
we behave like people of a slavish mentality and think of making English our national
language, we will be making ourselves the laughing stock for everyone. Similarly, no
regional language can be given this status" (pp. 141-142). "National dress is a symbol of
national identity. People of very self-respecting nation take pride in their national dress.
A few years ago, in our country, a Presidential Order made the wearing of the national
dress obligatory in all government offices and functions, and this is now being carried
out. The national dress is shalwar, qamis or kurta, shirwani and Jinnah cap" (p. 147).

For both Urdu and the national dress see Chapter 2.

Mutala'a-i-Pakistan, Punjab Textbook Board, Lahore, 9th reprint, March 1989, pp. 184.
Authors: Dr. Hasan Askari Rizvi. Javed Iqbal and Ghulam Abid Khan. Editors:
Professor Muhammad Aslam and Muhammad Salim Akhtar. Supervisors: Hifsa Javed
and Sibt-i-Hasan. Prepared by the Punjab Textbook Board. Print order 171,000 copies.

Muslim rule in India is disposed of in 5 pages (pp. 9-13); and we are told that "in the
subcontinent the Muslim rulers based their administrative system on Islamic principles,
and for this reason their rule was more popular than that of the non-Muslim rulers" (pp.
9-10); that "the local people [of India] adopted the Muslim way of life in their dress and
food" (p. 10); that "the British came to the subcontinent to trade with it, but they

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 35



employed methods [harbe] of power and cunning. After the failure of the war of
independence of 1857 the period of Muslim rule came to an end" (P. 13).

Did the Hindus of India prefer the rule of foreign Muslim invaders to the rule of their
own co-religionists? Was Mahmud Ghaznawi their hero? As for the Islamic nature of
the Muslim rule, was Akbar's administration based on shariat? In cultural matters the
Hindus adopted neither Muslim dress nor Muslim food. The Hindus did not wear
shalwar or eat beef.

Twenty pages are allotted to the period 1906-1947 (pp. 15-30), and here we find the
following gems of knowledge and information:

In 1930 at Allahabad Iqbal "prescribed his solution of the political problems of the
subcontinent: the Muslims should have a state of their own" (p. 21).

Iqbal did not suggest any such thing. See Chapter 2 for details.

In 1937 "the Congress won the elections by chance" (p. 21). This a plain lie. I give details
of the results of the 1937 elections in Chapter 2.

The Lahore or Pakistan Resolution "of 23 Mach 1940" demanded that the Muslims of the
subcontinent should have "their own homeland" (p. 22).

Both the date and meaning of the Lahore Resolution are wrong. Corrections in Chapter
2.

In 1947 the British Prime Minister was "Lord Attlee" (p. 26).

In 1947 the British Prime Minister was Mr. Attlee. The professors have no legal right to
bestow a peerage on a commoner, that belongs to the British monarch. They also have
no right to foresee Attlee as an Earl several years later, that belongs to God.

"After the establishment of Pakistan the Hindus and Sikhs created a day of doom for the
Muslims in East Punjab" (p. 27).

Didn't the Muslims create a similar day of doom for the Hindus and the Sikhs in West
Punjab and Sindh? The first communal killing on a large scale took place in Rawalpindi
and it was the work of the Muslims, the Sikhs being the victims.

"The Punjab played an important part in the nationalist struggle. In the beginning, some
Muslim leaders kept away from the Muslim League for the sake of their personal gain
and because of their links with the British, and they joined the Unionist Party and
opposed the creation of Pakistan. But the masses of the Punjab gave their full support to

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 36



the demand for Pakistan, with the result that these Unionist leaders were forced to
change their views" (p. 29).

The Punjab Unionist Party is discussed below in Chapter 2.

On the break-up of the country: "The military government of Yahya Khan held the first
general elections in December 1970 so that the elected representatives should prepare a
new constitution for the country. After the elections the country fell victim to a political
crisis. Taking advantage of the situation, foreign enemies also spread a network of
conspiracies against Pakistan. India created an army, made up of Bengalis and called
Mukti Bahini, and through it instigated disorder in East Pakistan. Later, on the pretext
of coming to the help of the Mukti Bahini. the Indian Army entered East Pakistan, as a
result of which the province of East Pakistan was separated from the rest of the country:
(p. 40).

I deal with the disordered vision of the 1971 crisis in Chapter 2.

"There are many countries of the world where more languages than one are spoken. In
most of the countries in Asia and Africa several languages are spoken. All the
languages spoken in a country are a part of its culture. But one of these is used for
purposes of national contact [rabita]; this language is called the national language" (p.
110).

"The prominent characteristic of Urdu is that it absorbs efficiently within itself words of
various [other] languages" (P. 111).

For the hollowness of the tall claims made on behalf of Urdu see Chapter 2.

Mutala-i-Pakistan, Sindh Textbook Board, Jamshoro. 4th ed., September 1989. p. 168.
Authors Professor Sayyid Qawi Ahmad, Professor Dr. Qazi Shakil Ahmad, Professor
Dr. Muhammad Hasan Sheikh, Professor Anwaar Ahmadzai, and Professor Rafique
Ahmad Dhanani. Print order: 15,000 copies.

The 1857 revolt Is called the "war of independence" (p. 11). Iqbal in 1930 advocated the
creation of a Muslim state (p. 17). The Lahore Resolution demanded that "the Muslims
of the subcontinent must have their separate homeland" (p. 27). On 1971: "After the
elections the country fell a victim to a political crisis, and exploiting this situation
foreign enemies spread a network of conspiracies against Pakistan, as a result of which
East Pakistan separated from the country" (p. 33). On the coup of 1977: "In the light of
the increasing political disorder, on 5th July 1977, General Muhammad Ziaul Huq, the
head of the Army, imposed Martial Law on the country and took over the reins of the
government" (p. 37).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 37



All these points are covered in Chapter 2.

On the Punjabi language: "Novel, drama and short story began to be created in the
Punjabi language at the beginning of the twentieth century. At the same time Punjabi
journalism had its birth. After this the trend started of writing in the Punjabi language
on new subjects like art, philosophy, history, linguistics, economics, geography,
medicine, law, etc. And today there is a considerable collection of published and
unpublished masterpieces in the language" (pp. 117-118).

On reading this I made inquiries from friends and acquaintances, contacted oriental
publishers and booksellers, talked to some of the staff in the Department of Punjabi at
the University of the Punjab, and visited the major academic and public libraries in
Lahore. My findings amounted to this: apart from an extremely modest corpus of
literary creations there is nothing available in the language. I failed to locate anything
written in Punjabi on economics, philosophy, medicine, law or geography. The
"considerable collection" exists in the fertile imagination of the Sindhi professors.

"Urdu is such a language that it contains words from every language [of the world].
And it is a feature of this language that when it accepts a word from any other language
it makes it its own" (p. 119).

On this see Chapter 2 below.

"The national dress of Pakistan is very simple and elegant. Men wear shalwar, qamiz or
kurta, shirwani and cap or turban; women generally wear, shalwar, qamiz and dupana" (p.
122).

This is discussed in Chapter 2.

Mutala-i-Pakistan, Sawalan Jawaban, by Sayyid Munir Ali Jafri. Gardezi Publishers,
Karachi, 1st ed., 13 March 1986, pp. 176.

This is a help book or a "made easy" for the students of class 9. It carries a note by
Sayyid Abdul Ghaffar Gardezi, the Publisher, which calls the author a man of letters,
journalist and poet of Islam "of whom the country is proud" (p. 4).

Some statements: Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan "established a school for the Muslims at
Aligarh in 1878" (p. 33). Sayyid Ameer Ali established the "Muhammadan Association"
in Calcutta (p. 35).

The Simla deputation demanded that the Muslims should be given representation in the
new Councils in accordance with their number; there is no mention of weightage (p. 39).
The Nehru Report came out in 1938 (p. 44).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 38



The MAO School of Aligarh opened on 24 May 1875, not 1878. Sayyid Ameer Ali's party
was called the Central National Muhammadan Association. The Nehru Report was
issued in 1928, not 1938.

Jinnah was a member of the Indian National Congress when Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan
was asking the Muslims to keep away from it (p. 49). Iqbal presented the concept of
Pakistan at Allahabad and in 1940 the Pakistan Resolution demanded "one Muslim
state" (p. 49). This resolution was passed on "23 March 1940" (p. 50). The Resolution
asked for the creation of "an independent country" for the Muslims (p. 51).

When Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan was asking the Muslims to keep away from the
Congress, Jinnah was a 12-year old student. Iqbal did not present the concept of
Pakistan at Allahabad. The Lahore Resolution did not demand one Muslim state or an
independent country but "independent states". See details in Chapter 2.

"What explains the delay in the making of the constitution of the country? The
politicians of our country know the reasons very well. No sooner had Pakistan been
established than a network of political conspiracies was spread, and self-interested
elements became busy in pursuing their own interests" (p. 60).

Were Jinnah and his colleagues in the Pakistan movement pans of this conspiracy?

"With the coming of Muhammad bin Qasim the Islamic period of South Asia began,
and it lasted about one thousand years, that is till the war of independence of 1857" (p.
144).

Muhammad bin Qasim did not conquer South Asia in 712, but only a small comer of it.
And nearly 300 years intervene between him and Mahmud Ghaznawi's establishment
of his rule in the Punjab. To date the Muslim rule over the subcontinent from 712 is bad
geography and worse history. In 1857 there was a mutiny, not a war of independence;
for this see Chapter 2. The "Islamic period" had ended several decades before 1857
when the Mughal emperors had consented to become pensioners of the British.

"Pakistan has been established on the very foundations of Islam. Therefore, the culture
of the country is naturally based on Islamic values. But it is sad to see that there is still
in the country one such section of people which has owned the Western way of life and
is avoiding the adoption of the Western way of life and is avoiding the adoption of the
Islamic way of life. Such people can only be called ignorant [nadan] (p. 145).

The "one such section" has not been identified. Is it the Westernized, educated elite
which runs the administration, the army, the business and commerce and the colleges
and universities of the country, or is it any political party?

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 39



"The people of the Punjab speak Punjabi language, and their special dress is shalwar and
turban" (p. 145).

This is as illuminating a piece of information as the statement that the people of France
speak French or the people of Greece speak Greek. If their "special dress" is shalwar and
turban, with what do they cover the part of the body lying between the turban and the
shalwar? I am a Punjabi, but I have never seen anyone in my province wearing a shalwar
on his lower body and a turban on his head and leaving his trunk bear. More
interestingly, this is supposed to be his "special dress". One wonders if he goes naked
most of the time.

"The special feature of Urdu is that it is spoken not only in every nook and corner of
South Asia but people who know and understand it are found in the whole world ....
Gradually Urdu has developed to a stage where now it is considered one of the more
developed languages of ale world. Not only that, but next to Arabic. Urdu is the only
language which has no equal in the world. The fact is that even English and French
languages are losing their popularity and importance before the Urdu language" (p.
147).

Two claims deserve notice and then ridicule. First, Arabic as a language has no equal in
the world (we are not told in what sense). Secondly, Urdu comes next in the order of
this distinction. But the author, who is also a poet of Islam of whom Pakistan is proud,
proceeds recklessly to enter another title on behalf of Urdu, and on his way in this
hazardous journey gives us the great and heart-wanting news that in the world of today
Urdu is leaving English and French behind in popularity and importance. He should
have gone the whole hog and told us that the British and the French are giving up their
languages and adopting Urdu.

Mutala-i-Pakistan, Sawalan Jawaban, by Muhammad Inamuddin, B.Com., B.Ed.,
Maktaba-i-Azmia, Karachi, n.d., pp. 152.

The book is meant for classes 9-10, and contains the following bits of information:

Iqbal in his Muslim League address of 1930 "at Lucknow" offered the idea of a separate
homeland for the Muslims (p. 28). The Lahore Resolution of "23 March 1940" demanded
"an independent country" (p. 28). General Ayub Khan took over power in October 1958
because the politicians and rulers of the country had been postponing general elections
(p. 38). "Ayub Khan resigned because of a popular agitation against him and transferred
authority to Yahya Khan .... In December 1971 the first general elections were held so
that the elected representatives could make a constitution. After the elections Pakistan
fell victim to a serious crisis and foreign conspiracies. In this state of disorder [afratafri]
in December 1971 the fall of East Pakistan took place" (p. 39).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 40



Iqbal spoke at Allahabad, not Lucknow, and he did not offer the idea of a Muslim
homeland; perhaps if he had spoken in Lucknow he would have done so, for place
maketh the man: Ayub Khan overthrew the government on the eve of the first general
election of the country. Under which law or constitutional provision did Ayub transfer
his authority as President of the Republic to the Commander-in-Chief of the Army? East
Pakistan did not fall in an afratafri; it fell because all Bengali Pakistanis were fed up with
Pakistan, the Pakistan Army was playing the tyrant in the most atrocious manner, and
the Pakistan armed forces were defeated by India. Afratafri is too feeble a word even to
act as a euphemism for defeat, humiliation, chaos, civil war and national disaster.

"Urdu is a part of our cultural heritage. Urdu is the only language which is still spoken
from Peshawar to Raskumari. Urdu is not older than Arabic, English and Sanskrit, but it
has a unique capacity for accepting words from other languages" (p. 106).

I have discussed these fairy tales about Urdu in one of my previous notes and I do it
again below in Chapter 2. Here I only ask one question: is Urdu a part of the cultural
heritage of the Baluchis, the Sindhis, the Pathans and even the Punjabis? Why can't Mr.
Inamuddin of Karachi accept the fact that the Urdu-speaking portion of Karachi is not
the whole of Pakistan?

"In the beginning of the twentieth century modem Punjabi literature was born, and
novel, drama and short story began to be written. After 1920 many books were written
in Punjabi on art, philosophy, history, linguistics, economics, geography, medicine and
law; today we have a large collection of these writings, and the literary productions of
the language are on the increase" (p. 108).

This point has been covered in one of my earlier comments.

Higher Secondary Level: Urdu Medium

Mutalia-i-Pakistan, Sindh Textbook Board, Jamshoro, first ed., August 1989. By various
authors. Editors: Muhammad Salim Akhtar, Senior Subject Specialist, Mrs. Hifsa Javed,
Subject Specialist, and Sibt-i-Hasan, Subject Specialist. Approved by the Government of
Sindh for use in the territories covered by the Boards of Intermediate and Secondary
Education of Karachi, Hyderabad and Sukkur. Print order: 10,000.

It is identical with the NWFP textbook that follows.

Mutalia-i-Pakistan. NWFP Textbook Board, Peshawar, n.d., pp. 183. Each chapter written
by a different author. Editors, Muhammad Saleem Akhtar, Senior Subject Specialist.
Mrs. Hifsa Javed, Subject Specialist, and Sibt-i-Hasan, Subject Specialist. Print order:
15,000 copies.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 41



Chapter 1, The Establishment of Pakistan, by Professor Sahibzada Abdur Rasul (pp. 1-
32), contains such statements as: "Muslims are by nature lovers of freedom. They don't
accept anyone's slavery. During British rule they were continuously struggling for the
achievement of independence" (p. 7); there is no mention of the Red Shirts or the
Congress in the account of the modem history of NWFP (p. 11), nor of the Unionist
Party with reference to the Punjab (pp. 13-14); "Iqbal was the first person to present the
idea of an independent Muslim state" (p. 14); "with the failure of the 1857 war of
independence Muslim power in India came to an end" (pp. 15-16): the Indian National
Congress "strove for the rights of the Hindus" (p. 16); in the list of the aims and objects
of the All India Muslim League, as laid down in 1906, the item on loyalty to the British
is omitted (p. 17); and the Lucknow Pact "increased the importance" of the Muslims (p.
18).

If the Muslims don't accept anyone's slavery, how do we explain to the students the
historical and very well-known fact that for long years the entire Muslim world save
Turkey was under European imperial rule? This leads to another question. If the
Muslims don't accept anyone's slavery, why have they, throughout their history,
imposed or tried to impose such slavery on other peoples? Does a different moral code
govern Muslim behavior? The statement on Iqbal has no basis. The 1857 revolt was not
a war of independence. The Congress strove for the rights of the majority of the Indian
people, not of the Hindus exclusively. The Lucknow Pact, far from increasing the
importance of the Muslims, made it possible for Bengali and Punjabi Muslims to rule
over their own provinces. See also below Chapter 2.

Chapter 2, History of Pakistan, by Dr. Professor Yar Muhammad (pp. 32-55), offers us
the following information: the Lahore Resolution was passed on "23 March 1940" (p. 33);
at the end of the war the Labour Party came into power in Britain under "Lord Mice" (p.
35); "after the partition of the subcontinent the Hindus and Sikhs started a properly
planned campaign of exploiting [istishal] the Muslims generally in the whole of Bharat
and particularly in East Pakistan, as a result of which the Hindu and Sikh enemies of
mankind killed and dishonored thousands, nay hundreds of thousands, of women,
children, the old and the young with extreme cruelty and heartlessness" (pp. 40-41).

The date of the Lahore Resolution should be read as 24 March. Attlee was not a peer
when he became prime minister of Britain in 1945. The Hindus and Sikhs were not the
only aggressors in the riots of 1947; Muslims also killed and raped and looted wherever
they had the opportunity.

Chapter 3, Establishing an Islamic State, by Dr. Hasan Askari Rizvi (pp. 56-71), glides
over the major turning points of the country's history with spurious glibness: "The 1956
constitution lasted only two years and a half. On 7 October 1958 the Army, led by
General (later Field Marshal) Muhammad Ayub Khan, assumed power" (p. 59): Ayub

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 42



"resigned on 25 March 1969 and handed over his authority to the Commander-in-Chief,
General Muhammad Yahya Khan" (p. 61); "before the major political parties which had
been successful in the elections could draw up a new constitution, some internal and
external elements collaborated to create the situation of a civil war in East Pakistan,
which later assumed the shape of an India-Pakistan war, with the result that on 16
December 1971 East Pakistan separated from us and became the mamlakat of
Bangladesh" (p. 62); "when no agreement could be reached between the Government
and the Pakistan National Alliance and the political situation of the country began to
deteriorate, on 5 July 1977 the Army, led by General Ziaul Huq, assumed power" (p. 65);
"during the Nizam-i-Mustafa movement of 1977 it had become clear that the people of
Pakistan wanted a speedy implementation of a complete Islamic system" (p. 66).

He has nothing to say on the immorality and illegality of the methods used by Ayub to
gain power, nor of his transferring his own constitutional authority to General Yahya
Khan in 1969. The explanation of the making of Bangladesh is tendentious. He does not
conceal his partiality for the Nizam-i-Mustafa movement and General Ziaul Huq.

Chapter 5, Pakistan's Culture, by Professor Sahibzada Abdur Rasul (pp. 98-122), while
describing the founders of our culture enumerates the names of Muhammad Ali Jauhar,
Shaukat Ali, Muhsinul Mulk, Waqarul Mulk, Sayyid Ahmad Khan. Shibli, Zakaullah
and Hali, and refers to the Aligarh movement, the Jainia Millia Islamia and the Nadwat-
ul-Ulema, but the only non-U.P., and Delhi person mentioned is Iqbal (pp. 109-110); the
contents of Iqbal's 1930 Allahabad address and his letters to Jinnah of 1937 are confused
with each other (p. 111); the "national dress of Pakistan" comprises "shalwar, qamiz or
kurta, shirwani and cap or turban for men and shalwar, qamiz and dupata for women" (p.
113); "in Islam marriage has the status of worship [Ibadat]" (p. 118).

With the single exception of Iqbal, all the founders of Pakistani culture are said to have
come from Delhi and the United Provinces. The areas forming Pakistan and Bengal
made no contribution to our past. This arid zone was ungraced by any literary creation,
social advance, educational progress or intellectual activity. Baluchi folk poetry and
classical stories, Pathan poetry and Pashto literature and Khushhal Khan Khattak,
Sindhi letters, Islathia College of Peshawar, Sindh Madrasa of Karachi, Khudai
Khidmatgars' social revolution in NWFP, Anjuman-i-Hamayat-i-Islam of Lahore,
Anjuman-i-Islamia of Amritsar, the Punjab Urdu press, Shaikh Sir Abdul Qadir,
Maulana Zafar Ali Khan. Oriental College of Lahore, Halqa-i-Arbab-i-Zauq of Lahore,
Ahmad Shah Bokhari Patras. Government and Islamic Colleges of Lahore, the entire
modern Urdu school of poetry of the Punjab, Saadat Hasan Manto's fiction,
distinguished Urdu journals of Lahore, Mian Bashir Ahmad of Humayun, Maulana
Zafar Ali Khan, Punjabi classical poetry from Waris Shah to Ustad Daman, Persian
poetry of Sindh of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries — all this and much more is
hidden from the eyes of the author. Such total blindness cannot be an act of nature. It is

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 43



inspired and not from above. If the professor chose to write such arrant nonsense, why
did the three "subject specialists" who edited the book let it pass?

We can draw another conclusion from the unanimous approval given to this statement
by the editors, the Textbook Board, the Government of the NWFP, and the Federal
Ministry of Education: the government upholds and propagates the view that the
culture of Pakistan has been imported in toto from outside and imposed upon the
country. The land and the nation have nothing to do with it. British imperialism has
been replaced by U.P imperialism. We are living in a colonial age under an alien culture
The Government of Pakistan has aimed at and achieved what the British masters of the
subcontinent did not even attempt.

For some reason this textbook was considered so good that the Sindh Textbook Board
adopted it as it stood for itself. The only change was that the Sindh Textbook carries a
date, August 1989 while the NWFP book did not carry any date.

Some students, probably a good number of them, do not use even these brief textbooks.
They prefer to use guides, "made easy" helps, and question-answer compilations. These
are based on the material contained in the textbooks examined above. As a specimen of
this historical literature, I now turn to one such work.

Universal Model Test Papers: Islamiat (Lazmi) wa Mutala-i-Pakistan (Lazmi), barai
Intermediate Students 1987-1988, compiled by Education Specialists and Examiners,
Board of Secondary Education of Pakistan, published by Kashmiri Kitab Ghar
Educational Publishers, Lahore, n.d., pp. 296. Author: S.A. Bukhari, M.A. Prepared in
strict accordance with the latest syllabus of the Board(s) of Intermediate Secondary
Education of Lahore, Multan, Sargodha, Bahawalpur, Rawalpindi, Azad Kashmir,
Peshawar, Hyderabad, Quetta and Gujranwala.

Part 2 (pp. 156-276) deals with Mutala'a-i-Pakistan. Examples of its contents follow:

"In 1940, in a meeting in Lahore, the Muslims of the subcontinent demanded for
themselves a separate mamlakat" (p. 161). It was a meeting of the All India Muslim
League, not of the Muslims; and it did not demand a separate state. See Chapter 2 for
full details.

In the paragraph on the NWFP there is no mention of the Red Shirts or the Congress (p.
162).

In the paragraph on the Punjab the Unionist Party's name does not appear (p. 164).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 44



"In 1885 an Englishman, Mr. Hume, founded the [Indian National] Congress. This party
strove for the [protection of the] rights of the Hindus" (p. 165). The Congress was not
founded by Hume, nor was it an exclusively Hindu body.

The list of Muslim League aims and objects of 1906 omits the item on loyalty to the
British Government (p. 165).

Under the Lucknow Pact, "the Muslims certainly lost in the matter of the allotment of
seats [in the provincial legislatures], but gained so far as the Congress, by conceding
separate electorates to the Muslims, acknowledged them as a separate nation. This was
a great victory for the Muslim League" (p. 170). By signing the Lucknow Pact the
Congress did not recognize the Muslims as a separate nation. See Chapter 2.

In 1930 Iqbal suggested that "India should be divided into various semi-independent
territories" (p. 173). Iqbal did not say anything of the sort. For details see Chapter 2.

"Here is it necessary to state that the [Lahore] Resolution of 1940 had presented the
concept of the establishment of two Muslim states in north-west and north-east. Later,
in the Muslim League annual session held in Delhi in 1946, another resolution decided
that the Muslim League wanted only one state named mamlakat-i-Pakistan" (p. 115). The
Lahore Resolution did not demand two Muslim states. The Delhi meeting which
amended (illegally) the Lahore Resolution was not an annual session of the All India
Muslim League, but a gathering of the members of the Indian Legislative Assembly,
Indian Council of State and provincial councils and assemblies who had been elected on
the Muslim League ticket. It had no right or authority to change the Lahore Resolution.
Full details of the Convention in Chapter 2.

"The Lahore Resolution was passed on 23 March 1940" (p. 182). Read 24 March for 23
March.

In 1945 the Labour Party came into power in Britain under "Lord Attlee" (p. 183). Attlee
was at this time a plain mister.

The coup of 1958 is attributed to 9 factors, but the role of the army and the ambition of
Ayub Khan are not mentioned (pp. 194-195).

After the 1970 general elections, "political negotiations between the two majority parties
were still in progress when, at Indian instigation, some mischievous elements created
disorder in East Pakistan. When Pakistan took steps to bring the situation under control,
the Indian Army, on some pretext, attacked East Pakistan in November 1971, and thus
East Pakistan separated in December 1971" (p. 200).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 45



"Before the major political parties which had emerged successful from the elections
could prepare a new constitution for the country, some internal and external elements
[andrun-i-mulk our bairuni anasar] conspired to create a situation of a civil war in East
Pakistan, which later assumed the form of an India-Bahar war, and as a result of this, on
16 December 1971, East Pakistan was separated from us and became Bangladesh" (p.
201).

See Chapter 2 for the factors responsible for the break-up of Pakistan in 1971.

On General Ziaul Huq's Islamic achievements: "Strict laws have been promulgated to
put an end to nudity [uriani], obscenity, and other social vices. The protection of honor
and privacy [chadar aur chardiwari] has been promised. Radio, television, cinema
industry and the press have been instructed to propagate Islamic trends and values. A
regular series of call to prayer, recitation of the Quran, teaching of Arabic and Islamic
and ethnical programmes has been introduced in radio and television. Prayers are said
regularly in congregation in government offices .... The Government has made special
efforts to ensure that no person or group, exploiting the name of Islam, fans the flame of
communal, linguistic or regional prejudices. Strict action is being taken against biased
writings and speeches with a view to promoting Islamic tolerance. Necessary changes
are being effected in the governmental system and election procedure to bring them
into line with Islamic principles: the Majlis-i-Shura has been established to attain this
object .... In short, every effort is being made to enforce a complete Islamic system in the
country, and in this connection valuable [qabil-i-qadr] steps have been taken, and in the
near future further steps will be taken which will result in the implementation in the
country of the Islamic system dreamed by the founders of Pakistan" (pp. 208-207).

For the Zia era see Chapter 2.

In 1920 the Muslims of India "felt a great need for the promulgation and propagation of
Islamic teachings on a very large scale. To achieve this, the Jamia Millia Islamia was
founded" (p. 232).

When Mawlana Muhammad Ali and his pro-Congress friends, egged on by the Hindus,
tried to take over the Aligarh University on behalf of the non-cooperation movement,
which would have put it under Gandhi's influence, and the University refused to be
coerced into an unwise and hasty decision, a group of Muslim leaders founded the
Jamia Millia in Aligarh as a "nationalist" and "patriotic" rival of Aligarh. Later it was
shifted to Delhi. It continued to be the intellectual centre of pro-Congress Muslims. Its
founding had nothing to do with the "promulgation and propagation of Islamic
teachings". In parentheses, it should be recorded that Gandhi and the Congress non-
cooperators did not try to take over the Hindu University of Benares. Their aim was to
destroy Aligarh in the name of Indian nationalism and on the pretext of giving life to

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 46



the Khilafat agitation. At this juncture Mawlana Muhammad Ali and company acted as
agents of the Congress.

It will be noticed that the coup of 1977 is not oven mentioned in the book.

With such books as the material on which the students are fed it is no wonder that
examines ask questions like "Why did the British establish the Indian National Congress
in India?" (History question paper, Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education,
Multan, 1987).

It must be noted here that Pakistan Studies (in company with English and Islamic
Studies) is a compulsory subject for students of the higher secondary or intermediate
classes in all groups: arts, humanities, pre-medical, pre-engineering, etc.

History is an optional subject on the Intermediate level. I have not seen any textbook on
the subject prepared by a Textbook Board. I have selected at random the following three
books in the field which I have found to be relatively better in quality and more
comprehensive than most others in the market or which are used more widely than
others. They have been prepared in accordance with the syllabus laid down by the
various Boards of Secondary and Intermediate Education (which are in change to all
aspects of education, from determining the curriculum to awarding fit diplomas, in the
last 2 years of school, 9th and 10th clan as, an, the first 2 years of college, the first and
second years).

Tarikh-i-Pakistan: 1708-1977 by Muhammad AbdulIah Malik, M.A., Head of the
Department of History, Islamia College (Railway Road), Lahore, published by Qureshi
Brothers, Lahore. 1988-89 ed., pp. 458.

The various periods are given unequal space: 1708-1857 gets 138 pages, 1858-1947, 178
pages, and 1947-1977, 142 pages.

If one were to write an adequate review of the book it would have to be based on a
critique of the following points: the 1857 revolt was nothing if not a war of
independence (pp. 125, 138); it is proper to call Sayyid Ahmad Khan the "real founder of
Pakistan" (p. 146); a full chapter is devoted to Sayyid Ahmad Khan and the Aligarh
movement (pp. 139-153); in 1905 John Morley was appointed "Secretary of State for
India and Pakistan" (p. 171); the Lucknow Pact is rated high as a Muslim achievement
(pp. 183-184); the Treaty of Serves is written throughout as Mualda Saiwray (p. 192.
etc.); the Hindu-Muslim unity engendered by the Khilafat movement was destroyed by
the "conspiracies of the British and the animus of the Hindu tafraqah-pasand groups" (p.
198); when Iqbal presented his scheme of "an independent Muslim mamlakat" in 1930,
"the Muslims made it their goal and owned Iqbal as their leader" (p. 218); in 1937 "there
existed Muslim ministries in the Punjab, Bengal and Sindh; the Congress wanted to

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 47



drive the Muslim League out of power in these provinces; therefore it conspired
continuously against the Muslim League and as a result these Muslim ministries fell" (p.
224): in 1896 Jinnah returned from England "with the degree of Barrister-at-law from
Lincoln Inn" (p. 228); Jamaluddin Afghani was the first person to think of a "Muslim
democratic state" [where?], and once he wrote that "India should be divided between
Hindus and Muslims, the Muslims getting the territory north of the Vindhiachal and
the Hindus the territory south of it" (quoting Sharifuddin Pireada) (p. 244); Abdul
Halim Sharar suggested a division of India "between Hindu and Muslim provinces" (p.
224); "the earliest expression of Muslim separatist sentiment from a political platform
was made at Allahabad in 1930 when "Iqbal called for a separate independent riasat for
Muslims of the subcontinent", he wanted "a separate mamlakat" (p. 245); Chaudhri
Rahmat Ali "issued a newspaper called Pakistan" (p. 246); "a Muslim delegate to the
Round Table Conference" dubbed the Pakistan scheme as nothing but the plan of a
student (p. 246); the Muslim League Working Committee and the Council met in Delhi
in February 1940 and decided that "Ore demand for the creation of a separate mamlakat
for the Muslims should be made at the Lahore session" (p. 248); the Lahore Resolution
was "passed on 23 March" (p. 250); Iqbal "received the degree of Bar-at-Law from the
University of Cambridge" (p. 293); Rahmat Ali was in government service after
resigning from the Aitchison College and he took his degree of LL.B. from the Law
College, Lahore (p. 304); eight reasons are listed for the Ayub coup of 1958, but the
army's or the General's ambition to rule is not among them (pp. 352-353) and the coup is
called a "revolution" [inqilab] (p. 353); in the 1965 war, "Pakistan inflicted ignominious
defeats on India on all fronts and broke its back"; at last "India's American and Soviet
friends. after a great deal of strenuous effort, arranged cease-fire on 23 September
through the United Nations" (pp. 351-362); all the reforms effected by Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto's Government were aimed at "enriching the workers of the People's Party" (pp.
382-383); the 1977 elections were rigged blatantly by the ruling party, the people reacted
angrily, the resulting agitation overwhelmed the whole country and the situation of a
civil war obtained; "to deal with this situation with responsibility, on 5 July the Pakistan
armed forces dismissed the Bhutto government and took power in their own hands" (p.
383); "the entire Pakistani society was shaken by the mass movement against the Bhutto
government .... the entire nation came out on the streets to put an end to Bhutto's
dictatorship; the ruling party then made up its mind to push the country into the
murderous bonfire of a civil war, and there were clear signs that the ruling party, in
collaboration with the fifth columnists, was bent upon putting the ideology of Pakistan
at stake in order to keep itself in power. In these circumstances, had Bhutto succeeded
in prolonging his dictatorship through the forces of his oppression and the moves of his
deceit and cunning, who knows what the nation would have been reduced to today!
Realizing this danger, the armed forces of Pakistan dismissed the Bhutto government
on 5 July 1977 and took power in their own hands" (p. 433); "The Supreme Court,
guided by the constraint of circumstances and the theory of necessity, validated the
army's action. The nation also breathed a sigh of relief at this change in the national
scene" (p. 434); the new Army leadership was determined to hold fresh elections within

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 48



90 days of the coup, but "the great majority of the people insisted on the accountability
of the malpractices [literal translation of unreadable Urdu] of the dark days of Bhutto's
rule before the holding of any elections, so that all those criminal elements could be
exposed who, behind the Facarie of democracy, had drunk the blood of the country and
the nation. On this, the new leadership. which was intoxicated with the necessity [literal
translation of unreadable Urdu] of safeguarding the ideology of Pakistan and believed
in justice, postponed the holding of elections and started the process of accountability
with all its might and main" (p. 434): "the foreign policy followed before 5 July 1977 had
suffered from many weaknesses of shortcomings. The nations of the world had lost
faith in Pakistan because of her continuous lying and deceit and cheating. With one or
two exceptions, all Muslim countries were angry and fed up with Pakistan. The present
Army government, under the leadership of General Muhammad Ziaul Huq, turned the
national foreign policy in the right direction, exactly as required by the interests of the
country and the nation" (p. 440).

Most of the mistakes contained in these statements have been corrected in Chapter 2. I
attend to the rest here. It is not explained why we should accept Sayyid Ahmad Khan as
the "real founder" of Pakistan. In John Morley's time at the India Office (1905-10) there
was no Pakistan, so he could not possibly have carried the title of Secretary of State for
India and Pakistan. In 1937 there was no Muslim ministry in the Punjab, it was a
Unionist ministry made up of and backed by all the three communities of the province.
Jamaluddin "Afghani" never suggested a partition of India on religious lines. Abdul
Halim Sharar wanted a division between Hindu and Muslim districts, not provinces.
Chaudhri Rahmat Ali never issued a newspaper called Pakistan; and his scheme was
not rejected by a Muslim delegate to the Round Table Conference but by some of the
Muslim witnesses appearing before the Joint Select Committee on Indian Constitutional
Reform. The Muslim Leagues reported decision in favor of a partition of India taken in
February 1940 is not to be found in the official text of the resolutions of the pony
published by its office. Rahmat Ali did not take his law degree from the Law College,
Lahore; he attended the College for some time but left without appearing in the
examinations. The news that the nation "breathed a sigh of relief" at General Ziaul Haq's
coming to power is not historical information but blatant and false propaganda.

Tarikh-i-Pakistan by Professor Sheikh Muhammad Rafique, Head of Department of
History, Islamia College (Civil Lines), Lahore, in collaboration with Professor Sayyid
Masud Haider Bukhari, M.A. (History and Persian), Government College, Sahiwal, and
Professor Chaudhri Nisar Ahmad, M.A. (History and Urdu), Government College,
Faisalabad, published by Standard Book House, Lahore, new ed. 1989, pp. 560. Written
in accordance with the syllabi of the Boards of Intermediate and Secondary Education
of Lahore, Rawalpindi, Sargodha, Multan and Gujranwala.

The period 1707-1857 is given 184 pages, that of 1858-1947 220 pages, and that of 1947-
1977 171 pages.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 49



Chapter 8 (pp. 169-191) is entitled "The War of Independence, 1857". Chapter 9 (pp. 192-
220) is devoted to Sayyid Ahmad Khan and the Aligarh movement. On the Lucknow
Pact: under it "the Congress accepted the Muslims as a separate nation and the Muslim
League as its [sole] representative" (p. 253): "with much cunning the Hindu put an end
to Muslim majority in [the legislatures of] the Punjab and Bengal and procured a
majority for himself" (pp. 253-254). The Treaty of Serves is written as Mu'aida-i-Saiwray
(p. 261). Chaudhri Rahmat Ali developed further Iqbal's 1930 scheme by establishing a
Pakistan National Movement in 1933; "in 1935", in 4-page pamphlet, "he demanded the
separation of Muslim India from the rest of India" (p. 521). "The Unionist Party
leadership did not allow any other Muslim party to emerge in the Punjab and, in
collaboration with a few prejudiced Hindus and Sikhs, inflicted irreparable damage on
Muslim unity .... This party could not play any positive role in the war of independence
because its moving spirits were landholders of the variety of knights, Khan Bahadurs
and toadies of the British; obedience of the British was in their nature .... Call it the
change wrought by time or a misfortune for the nation that after independence these
Unionist leaders, the enemies of the Muslims, imposed themselves on this mazlum
nation" (p. 344).

Under the Lucknow Pact the Congress neither accepted the Muslims as a separate
nation nor acknowledged the Muslim League as their sole representative; and if the
Pact, because of Hindu cunning, deprived the Punjabi and Bengali Muslims of their
majority in the provincial legislatures, why did Jinnah and the Muslim League accept
the forfeit? Was it Hindu cunning or League shortsightedness? Rahmat Ali did not
"develop further" Iqbal's 1930 proposal; his scheme was totally different from Iqbals;
and his plan was issued in 1933, not 1935. For the Unionist Patty see Chapter 2.

Iqbal took his "Ph.D. and Barrister degrees from Trinity College, Cambridge" (p. 361).
He "was the first leader in the subcontinent to present the two-nation theory with great
vehemence [puri shiddat] . . . and in his Allahabad address of 1930 offered a clear
concept of Pakistan" (p. 365).

On all these ipse dixik about Iqbal see Chapter 2.

Chapter 18 on "Famous Muslim Leaders" reveals a characteristic imbalance: Sayyid
Ameer Ali has 2 pages, Nawab Salimullah of Dacca, 1 page, Muhammad Ali Jauhar 5,
the Aga Khan 3, Iqbal 4½ Sir Fazl-i-Husain 2½, Zafar Ali Khan 3, A.K. Fazlul Haq 1, Sir
Abdul Qayyum Khan 1½, and Abdullah Haroon 1 (pp. 351-374).

The post-independence period is treated with equal carelessness, ignorance and bias.

"As soon as the division of the country was announced bloodshed on a large scale [khun
ki holi] followed .... Muslim localities were attacked. Their villages were set on fire.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 50



Extreme cruelties were inflicted on them. Till they were forced to abandon their homes
and leave for Pakistan" (p. 395). He is quick to put all blame for the 1947 massacres on
the non-Muslims, but does not explain why the non-Muslims living in West Pakistan
were attacked, forced to migrate to India or murdered.

The Ayub Khan coup of 1958 is called a "Revolution" and 10 causes of it are listed, but
no reference is made to the army's ambition to rule (pp. 448-451).

The 1971 break-up of the country is treated in detail and with blatant bias. The only
parties to emerge unscathed from the account are the army and the Jamaat-i-Islami (pp.
476-492).

Chapter 23 on the years of Bhutto's prime ministership is frankly partisan and reads like
a press release of the Ministry of Information under General Zia's rule. It ends by
offering thanks to God for having accepted the sacrifices made by the nation during the
anti-Bhutto agitation and for crowning the efforts of the people with success (pp. 493-
514).

Some other statements: Ayub issued the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance to please some
educated women of the country (p. 471), and it played a major part in creating hatred
against the Ayub regime (p. 472).

In the 1971 India-Pakistan war, "the Pakistan armed forces created new records of
bravery, and the Indian forces were defeated everywhere" (p. 483). If in 1971 the
Pakistan Army showed such bravery and the Indians were beaten everywhere, why did
the victorious Pakistan Army surrender to India in Dacca? The astounding
contradiction is as inexplicable as it is irresolvable.

"The Hindus of East Pakistan engineered anti-Urdu demonstrations during Jinnah's
time and at last the federal politicians accepted the humiliating situation and declared
Bengali as the second national language. This movement sowed the seeds of hatred" (p.
487). Why was it humiliating for the Government of Pakistan to accept Bengali as the
second national language? Demography, democracy and morality dictated that Bengali
should be made the only national language of the country, and if West Pakistanis
protested too much Urdu would have been given the second place to placate and please
them.

Bhutto's most important achievement was the declaration of the Qadiani as a non-
Muslim minority" (p. 506).

In 1965, the military superiority of Pakistan forced India to accept a cease-fire (p. 534).
In 1965 Pakistan did not force India to accept a cease-fire. The honors of war were
almost equally divided. But Pakistan was short of arms and ammunition and spare

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 51



parts for which it depended on the United States of America, and was incapable of
lighting beyond 30 days. The cease-fire was arranged at the intervention of the United
Nations.

In 1971. India, "with the connivance of the major powers and with the open help of
Russia, intervened militarily in East Pakistan and separated it from Pakistan" (p. 534).
This is fully dealt with in Chapter 2.

Tarikh-i-Pak-o-Hind by Anwaar Hashmi, M.A.. Karachi Book Centre, Karachi. 5th ed.,
June 1984, pp. 600.

It has been written in accordance with the syllabus prescribed by the Boards of
Secondary and Intermediate Education of Hyderabad. Multan, Lahore and Sargodha.
The author has written several other books in Urdu and English.

The section on the period 1857-1974 contains the following statements:

The revolt of 1857 is called the "war of independence" (pp. 478-487); the Lucknow Pact
of 1916 was "in reality an agreement between the Hindus and the Muslims, in which the
Hindus practically admitted the separate identity of the Muslims and the status of the
Muslim League as their representative party" (pp. 511-512); both "the Hindus and the
Muslims boycotted" the Simon Commission (p. 516); Iqbal "took the degree of Barristry
from the Oxford University" (p. 519); during the third Round Table Conference "some
Muslim students studying at the University of Cambridge published a pamphlet called
Now or Never" (p. 521); Chaudhri Rahmat Ali died "in 1948" (p. 523); the Pakistan
Resolution was adopted "on 23 March 1940" (p. 528); Jinnah "was elected the first
Governor General of Pakistan" (twice on p. 537); in 1958 "the country was preparing for
the general elections, the politicians were trying for their success. and a proper
democratic government was expected to be established after the elections, but on 8
October Martial Law was imposed, the 1956 constitution was abrogated, and on 27
October a military government came into office" (p. 543); on a date and in a year which
are not mentioned, "President Muhammad Ayub Khan resigned and handed over the
administration of the country to the army" (p. 558).

The contents of the provisions of the Lucknow Pact have been fabricated here. The one-
half of the All India Muslim League, the Shafi portion, cooperated with the Simon
Commission; the other half, Jinnah's faction, boycotted the British inquiry. Now or
Never was not the work of "some Muslim students" studying at Cambridge; of the four
signatories to it only one, Rahmat Ali, belonged to Cambridge. Ramat Ali died in 1951,
not 1948. Jinnah was not elected Governor General of Pakistan because it was not an
elective office; he was appointed by the British King. Other points are covered in
Chapter 2.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 52



The Break-up of East Pakistan is described in these words: "In East Pakistan a great deal
of propaganda was already being carried on against West Pakistan, and after the
announcement of the postponement of the session of the National Assembly great
disorder began in the province in which peace and quiet disappeared. Elements which
were enemies of Pakistan took advantage of this situation and utilized it for their own
poisonous goals. These people had already been inciting the simple fold of East
Pakistan to demand separation, and now they assured the Bengalis that the West
Pakistani leadership did not want to transfer power to East Pakistan. After this the
Bengalis were given the impression that a conspiracy was being hatched against them.
Thus the movement of subversion and secession became strong in East Pakistan, and at
last things went out of control. West Pakistanis and Biharis were massacred and the
province was openly looted ... When things were completely beyond his control. Yahya
Khan ordered an army action. Within one month the army, to a great extent, cleared
every part of East Pakistan of rebels and miscreants and also all the enemies of Pakistan
and their agents .... After the military action Yahya Khan did not pay any attention to a
political solution of the real problem. Therefore the rebel elements once again became
active. At last in November 1971 the Indian army invaded East Pakistan in full force
(and in December also attacked West Pakistan) and things took such a turn that by the
middle of December East Pakistan went into the hands of India" (pp. 579-580).

For a proper account of the 1971 break-up see Chapter 2.

It should be noticed that in the last part of the book, which deals with the modern
period, Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan has a chapter (pp. 494-502) to himself, while the role of
Bengal in the national politics or the Pakistan movement is not brought out.

English Medium Textbooks

The Textbook Boards do not publish textbooks for all the classes in the English medium
schools. There are a few exceptions. which I will notice below. In this section I deal with
the books in common use in the government and private schools which teach through
the medium of the English language.

Class 1

Social Studies by Qulabuddin Khan, B.Ed., Rchbar Publishers, Karachi,
n.d., unpaginated.

Pakistan "was founded on 14th August, 1947" (lesson 2); Iqbal "was the first Muslim to
give the idea of Pakistan" (lesson 4). Police is the only department of government
described in the book in lesson 14, and no reason has been given for making this
singular choice.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 53



Classes 1-2

Social Studies, Iqbal Book Depot, Karachi, n.d., pp. 16.

"Our Pakistan was founded by Quaid-i-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah on 14th August
1947. Pakistan is one of the biggest Muslim Country in the world" (p. 3); Iqbal "was the
first Muslim to give the idea of separate Motherland for Muslims called Pakistan. He
took his Primary Education at Sialkot and higher education in England and Germany ....
He was buried in front of Lahore Shahi Masjid"; the question at the end of the lesson
runs: "where he took his education?" (p. 6); Sir Sayyid Ahmed Khan "founded Muslim
University of Aligarh" (p. 7); Muhammad Ali Jauhar "got his education at Aligarh
University" (p. 8). "Karachi has many beautiful places where the children enjoy during
the visit" (p. 11).

Sayyid Ahmad Khan founded the MAO College, Aligarh; the University of Aligarh was
established more than twenty years after his death. Mawlana Muhammad Ali was
educated at the MAO College. Aligarh (it was not yet a university) and at the University
of Oxford.

Class 2

Social Studies for Elementary Classes by Qutabuddin Khan, B.A., B.Ed.
(Alig.) (with some other Diplomas and Certificates which cannot be
deciphered), Haroon Brothers. Karachi, n.d., pp. 25.

Iqbal "was the first Muslim Leader to visualize Pakistan" (p. 3); Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan
"founded Muslim University Aligarh" (p.4).

Sayyid Ahmad Khan founded the MAO College, Aligarh; not the Aligarh Muslim
University.

Social Studies by Qutbuddin Khan, Rehbar Publishers, Karachi, n.d., pp. 24.

Pakistan "came into being on 14th August, 1947 .... Pakistan has been carved out for
Islamic ideology" (p. 5); the Pakistan Resolution "was passed on 23rd March, 1940" (p.
6). Lesson No. 8 deals with Hazrat Data Ganj Baldish, No.11 with Major Raja Abdul
Aziz Bhatti, an army officer who was killed in the 1965 India-Pakistan war, and No. 15
with King Faisal of Saudi Arabia.

Pakistan came into being on 15 August, not 14 August. The asseveration that Pakistan
"has been carved out for Islamic ideology" is bad English, twisted history, and unsound
pedagogy. While European and American philosophers and professors are still

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 54



wrangling about the precise connotation of the concept of ideology our author expects
class 2 students not only to grasp the meaning of the word but also to understand its
connection with the creation of Pakistan. It is such fuddled and widest statements
which drive the forlorn student to memorize a sentence without comprehending it.

Class 3

Social Studies by Qutbuddin Khan, Rehbar Publishers, Karachi, n.d., pp.
48.

"Millions of Muslims came from India and settled in Karachi. They established here
plenty of mills, factories, offices, colonies, and grand buildings" (p. 8); Quaid-i-Azam's
mausoleum "at night shines in the flash light" (p. 10); "courts keep order and peace in
the district" (p. 29); "the police keeps order and peace in the district" (p. 30); television
"is the most effective media of mass communication .... It is gifted with hearing as well
as seeing" (p. 36). The lesson on the Pakistan Resolution reads "the Muslims of South
East Asia awoke from their sleep. They all wanted a Separate Muslim State. The Muslim
League representing the whole of Muslim India, met in Lahore and passed a resolution
on 23 March, 1940, demanding a Separate State for the Muslims of India. This resolution
is now known as the Pakistan Resolution. The Muslims succeeded in their struggle on
14 August. 1947. The Ideology of Pakistan rests on Islam" (p. 37).

On the founding of Pakistan by Jinnah see my note on the first book in Urdu for class I
with which this chapter opens. Television is a medium, not a media. Pakistan is in
South Asia, not South East Asia. The Muslims League did not represent "the whole of
Muslim India" in early 1940. The Lahore Resolution did not ask for a state but for states.
Once again, the young students have been confronted with the word "ideology".

The language in which the book is written in hardly recognizable as English.

A Beginner [sic.] History of Indo-Pakistan [sic.] by A.Q. Qureshi, M.A. (Islamic Studies and
History), Punjab; Post-Graduate Certificate in Education (Cantab); Senior Housemaster
and Head of the Department of Social Studies, P.A.F. Public School, Lower Topa,
Murree Hills, Imperial Book Depot. Lahore, first published in 1964. revised edition,
March 1983 (but actually this hook has been brought up to date till September 1986), pp.
104.

The outer cover carries photographs, in this order, of Jinnah, Iqbal, Ayub Khan, Sir
Sayyid Ahmad Khan and Muhammad Ali Jauhar. The title creates a new area or
country or subcontinent called "Indo-Pakistan". In his Foreword, P.H. Harwood, the
Principal of the authors school, commends the book as "a novel and important addition
to the textbooks already in use" (p. iv).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 55



"The people of West Pakistan spoke a number of languages, but chose Urdu as their
national language. The people of East Pakistan spoke Bengali and that was their
national language. As time passed, the people of East Pakistan thought they would
have a separate country of their own and call it Bangla Desh. So in 1972, East Pakistan
became Bangla Desh and West Pakistan was called PAKISTAN" (pp. 2-3); "we have
good relations with all our neighbors including India" (p. 4); "men and women wear
Kamees and Shalwar" (p. 4); "India is also called Bharat. Bharat is the country of non-
Muslims .... There are crores of Muslims in India" (p. 11); Mahmud Ghaznawi "came to
India many times" (P. 12); in 1857 the people of India fought a "War of Independence"
(p. 14); "the Indian National Congress wanted the English to go away from India,
leaving the rule of India in their hands" (p. 15); the leaders of the Muslim League
"wanted a separate Home-Land for the Muslims of India" (p. 15); on 14th August, 1947,
they [the English] divided India into two free countries" (p. 16); Rahmat Ali "made this
word [Pakistan] by taking letters from the names of some Muslim Provinces of India"
(p. 17): "if you are asked who was the greatest Muslim ever born in Indo-Pakistan, you
may say Hazrat Shah Waliullah of Delhi" (p. 19); Shah Waliullah obtained degrees in
the Quran and Hadith "from Arabia" (p. 20): his translation of the Quran into Persian
"was the first translation of the Quran into any other language" (pp. 20-21); "Urdu was
the spoken language of the common people" of the subcontinent (p. 21); as a result of
the 1857 revolt "the British Government turned against the Muslims, who were
martyred" (p. 29); "Muhammad Ali felt that the Hindus wanted to make the Muslims
their slaves and since he hated slavery, he left the Congress" (p. 34); Muhammad Ali
"founded Jamia Millia Islamia at Delhi to spread the Teachings of Islam" (p. 35); his
"pen-name was Jauhar" (p. 35); Iqbal "got higher education at the Cambridge and
London Universities. He also went to Germany and returned as Dr. Muhammad Iqbal"
(pp. 38-39); "in a speech at Allahabad, he said that the Muslims of India should have a
separate country of their own. Thus he was the first man to give the idea of Pakistan" (p.
40); "the Congress was actually a party of the Hindus. The Muslims felt that after
getting freedom the Hindus would make them their slaves. But Jinnah did not feel like
that. He wanted the Hindus and the Muslims to work together for their freedom. At
about this time Iqbal gave the idea of Pakistan" (p. 47); "in March, 1940, Pakistan was
demanded at a meeting in Lahore" (p. 49); Ayub Khan "was a soldier. He did not want
to take up the government of the country. But the conditions forced him to do so. The
people in power were ruining the country. He did not bear all this. He thought that he
should come forward the set things right" (p. 56); Ayub Khan "took away land from the
big landlords and gave it to the farmers. The people of Pakistan were very pleased with
President Ayub. They gave him a higher army rank" (p. 58); "in a public meeting held at
Lahore on 23 March, 1940 we demanded Pakistan" (p. 60): "the Muslims of India got
their separate homeland after a long struggle under the leadership of the Quaid-i-
Azam" (p. 62).

The people of West Pakistan were never given a chance to choose their national
language. Urdu was imposed on them by an unrepresentative assembly and later by

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 56



military dictators. The spectacle of the people of East Pakistan thinking, as time passed,
of having a separate state of their own is a unique description of the 1971 civil war and
the war with India; it is the work of a moron. The declaration of Pakistan's good
relations with India makes nonsense of the several wars fought between the two
countries and described with splendid partiality in most of the textbooks (remember,
the author teaches at a school run by the armed forces of Pakistan). If Bharat is a
country of non-Muslims. how does one explain the presence of about 120 million
Muslims there. Mahmud Ghaznawi did not come to India, he invaded it. The British did
not divide India on 14 August 1947, but on the following day. Shah Waliullah's
translation of the Quran into Persian was not the first translation of the Book into any
language; a few Latin translation of the Book had appeared in the 17th century. The
Jamia Millia was not established to spread the teachings of Islam but to serve as a centre
of "nationalist" pro-Congress Muslim propaganda. Iqbal never studied at the University
of London. I have coveted the other points in Chapter 2 below.

So much for the knowledge that the author is passing at to the students. As for the
language in which the communication is carried out the following specimens should
suffice: "Are not you proud that you have a country of your own?" (p. 4); "we hope to
have better relations with India when she settle all disputes with us" (pp. 4-5); "there are
crores of Muslims in India but non-Muslims are more in numbers" (p. 11); Shahabuddin
Ghauri left his general, Aibak, in India, and then "the rule remained in his family for
several years" (p. 12); Sayyid Ahmad Shahid "came to know that the Sikhs were being
cruel to the Muslims in Punjab" (p. 22); Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan's mother "did all her
duties regularly" (p. 27); Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan was "very fond of swimming and
arrow-shooting" (p. 28); Ayub Khan "started many reforms in the country (p. 57); on the
birthday of Iqbal "We say good words about him" (p. 61); during the reign of Shahjahan
"all the crops died in the Deccan" (p. 91); "when you see these buildings you will come
to know how great were the Moghuls" (P. 97).

Class 4

Social Studies, published by Ilm-o-Amal Book Depot. Karachi, for the Sindh Textbook
Board, Hyderabad, March 1978, pp. 95. Authors: Mirza Ishaque Baig and Sayyid
Tilmeez Hasnain Rizvi. Convener [sic.]: Abdul Majeed Abbasi. Translated by Mirza
Ishaque Baig. Print order: 10.000 copies.

"During the British rule all the Muslims of South Asia formed a political party. The
name of that party was the All India Muslim League. The aims of this party were to get
freedom from the British and to get a permanent homeland for the Muslims. The name
of this new country was proposed as Pakistan" (p. 5); the Pakistan Resolution contained
the names of the "Muslim populated areas" which were to form Pakistan; it was passed
on 23 March 1940 (p. 6); after 14 August 1947, "all the Muslim British Indian
Government servants who had opted for Pakistan began to reach Karachi. Other

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 57



Muslims who were living in the Hindu majority areas also migrated to arrive in Sindh"
(p. 6); although Sindh was under martial Law in 1978, yet a 3-page lesson on the Sindh
Assembly describes the working and functions of the legislature (pp. 67-69).

The All India Muslim League, when formed in 1906 and for a long time after that,
neither spoke for all the Muslims of India (look at the 1937 election results) nor fixed its
goal as the freedom of India (this was much later) nor aimed at the creation of a Muslim
homeland (that was in 1946, not even in 1940 when the demand was that for "states").
The Lahore Resolution did not contain the names of the areas claimed for Pakistan. All
the Muslims living in the Hindu-majority areas did not migrate to Sindh in 1947; had
they done so Sindh today would have had a population of about 140 million and India
would have had no Muslim inhabitants.

Class 5

Social Studies published by Ilm-o-Amal Book Depot, Karachi, for the Sindh Textbook
Board, Hyderabad. February 1982, pp.120. Author: S. Humid Ali Jeffery. Translated by
Edgar Victor. Print order. 10.000 copies.

In 1857 "the Muslims rose against" the British. "The uprising is known as the First War
of Independence" (p. 3); "under the patronage of the British the Hindus made a political
party of their own which was called the Indian National Congress" (p. 3); Iqbal "for the
first time presented the concept of a separate homeland for the Muslims ... in 1930 at
Allahabad ... he suggested that the Muslim majority regions of South Asia may be
declared as independent Muslim State" (p. 4); "in the year 1940 . . . the Muslims of South
Asia demanded an independent Muslim State" (p. 5): about the 1971 break-up: "through
its agents and other self-seekers Bharat at first caused great troubles in East Pakistan
and then attacked it from three sides. This was in the year 1971. Pakistan was forced to
fight with Bharat in order to defend its eastern wing. The war continued for 3 weeks
and ended in the creation of a separate state called Bangle Desh" (p. 8). One full chapter
of 10 pages deals with the armed forces; another deals with the constitutional and
political system of the country, but does not mention Martial Law under which the
country was living when the book was published.

The Congress was not a Hindu party, and it was not established under British
patronage. On the other hand, the British did support the MAO College, Aligarh, and
the All India Muhammadan Educational Conference of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan; facts
which are deliberately omitted from every textbook.

Social Studies for Pakistan by Farida Syed and Asma Ibrahim, FEP International Pak
(Private), Limited, 1987, pp. 97.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 58



Pakistan "came into being on August 14, 1947 as an independent state for the Muslims
of Indian Subcontinent. The name 'Pakistan' was chosen by Chaudhri Rahmat Ali. It
comprises words from every province and means 'the land of Paks' — the spiritually
clean and pure. The ideology of Pakistan is Islam and the country's constitution is
democratic" (p. 34); at some date which is not given, "Muslims, fearing that their culture
and religion would be submerged, started a political movement demanding a separate
Muslim state. All politically conscious Muslims of the Subcontinent such as Allama
Iqbal, Sir Syed and many others were in the favor of this idea. The struggle for Pakistan
started in the 1930s. It had the full support and cooperation of the Muslims. The
movement for Pakistan was getting stronger day by day, and then our great leader
Quaid-i-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah also joined hands with the Muslims ... the
Pakistan Resolution was passed on 23 March, 1940 ... This resolution demanded two
independent states in the Subcontinent ... after the Pakistan Resolution was passed,
communal riots broke out in many cities of the Subcontinent" (pp. 35-36). This book is
exceptionally well produced.

Pakistan came into being on 15 August 1947, not 14 August (for full details see Chapter
2). Rahmat Ali coined or invented the name Pakistan; he did not choose it. If the
ideology of Pakistan is Islam, what is her religion? In 1987 the constitution of Pakistan
was certainly not democratic, the country was being ruled by a General who had
usurped power through an act of treason (as defined in the Constitution), got himself
elected President through the fraud of a referendum, and who had tinkered at the 1973
constitution through personal fiats, arrogated to himself unprecedented powers, and
who was still in uniform. Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan is not known by anyone to have been
in favor of creating a separate Muslim state. The struggle for Pakistan began in 1940, not
in the 1930s. The Lahore Resolution did not demand two states; the number was not
specified. No communal riots broke out after the adoption of the Lahore Resolution or
because of it.

Class 6

Social Studies, published by Sh. Shaukat Ali and Sons, Karachi, for the Sindh Textbook
Board, Hyderabad, 1st. ed., March 1982, pp. 78. Author: Syed Hamid Ali Jaffery.
Translated by Edgar Victor. Print order: 12,000 copies.

The revolt of 1857 is called the "First War of Independence" (p.65); "The Hindus ...
established Congress in the year 1885" (p. 66); in a year which is not given, Iqbal is said
to have "openly demanded that Punjab, Sindh, NWFP and Baluchistan which have
Muslim majority may be made an independent Muslim State" (p. 68): the Pakistan
Resolution, passed on 23 March 1940, announced that "the Muslim areas were to form
an independent and sovereign state" (p. 69); chapter X on Civil Life in Pakistan (pp. 72-
78) does not mention Martial Law which was then in force in the country.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 59



All statements about Iqbal and the Lahore Resolution are false. For corrections see
Chapter 2 below.

Class 7

First Steps in Our History by Dr. Kh. A. Haye, M.A., Ph.D., Diploma in Archivism [sic.],
Ex. G.C.S. Class-I (Senior), Retired Head of Department of Modem Subjects, Pakistan
Military Academy, Kakul, Ferozsons, Lahore, new edition, n.d., pp. 167.

In his foreword, Major General Shaukat Ali Shah, Commandant, Pakistan Military
Academy, says: "History is the record of Man in quest of his daily bread. As such the
record to human conflicts is bound to contain the elements of human prejudice and
interest to perpetuate. The advantage of the master over the subject .... In this book a
beginning has been made to record the events without external fear (p. 6). In the
preface, the author claims: "This book has been written for young children reading in
Public schools. It differs from other similar books which too often mix facts with fiction
and give a rather clouded view of our history. This book aims to give a sound
knowledge of our proud heritage" (p. 8).

The English who conquered India were "clever and crafty", and they "by guile and craft
made themselves the masters of our country. For a hundred and fifty years they
remained in power till we decided to become independent" (p. 13); "clever and crafty as
these Englishmen are ..." (p. 129); in 1857 we "fought the War of Independence" (p. 133);
"one of the great thinkers of Pakistan" was Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan (p. 141): "the first
Muslim to have put in words the idea of Pakistan" was Iqbal (p.155); in 1930 Iqbal "for
the first time gave the idea of separate States, for the Muslims and the Hindus of the
sub-continent. He had come to believe that the two-nations could not peacefully live
together in one State" (p. 158); "on August 14th 1947, the Indian subcontinent was
divided, and ... the grateful Nation made the Quaid-i-Azam the first Governor-General
of Pakistan" (p. 164).

How does Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan become a great thinker of Pakistan when he died
nearly fifty years before the creation of the country and he did not belong to its soil?
India was divided on 15, not 14, August. The Pakistani nation played no part at all in
making Jinnah the Governor General of the country. He selected himself for the office
and his appointment was made by the British King.

A Junior History of Indo-Pakistan by Sayyid Fayyaz Mahmud, Oxford University Press,
Karachi, first published 1961, second edition 1972, third edition 1988. pp. 72.

"In December 1971 the eastern part separated from Pakistan and was called Bangladesh.
The western part alone is now known as Pakistan" (p. 1); the revolt of 1857 is called "the

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 60



War of Independence" (pp. 50-51); "some fourteen years later. Indo-Pakistan was
declared to be an empire of the British ... the governor-general was now called a
viceroy" (p. 52): photographs of Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Iqbal and the Aga Khan
appear with the postscript "Leading figures of the Pakistan Movement" (p. 56); "for
twenty years Hindus and Muslims worked together in Congress"; the Muslims formed
the Muslim League "in 1905" (p. 57); in 1947 "Pakistan chose Quaid-i-Azam Muhammad
Ali Jinnah as her Governor-General" (p. 59); in 1958 "Martial Law was declared, the
Constitution was abolished, and government by corrupt and incompetent political
parties brought to an end" (p.61); on 25 March 1969 "President Ayub handed over the
government to General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan,. Commander-in-Chief of the
Army, and retired" (p. 62); "over 4 crore" of the population of East Pakistan was Hindu
and it was "not loyal to Pakistan" (p. 63): the account given of the break-up of Pakistan
in 1971 is extremely misleading (pp. 63-65); on the 1977 coup: "the Army Chiefs thought
it was high time to strike and they arranged a coup" (p. 68): the chapter on the Martial
Law of General haul Haq does not contain a single word of criticism of the military rule
(pp. 69-72): the book ends with the sentence "The future waits to see how and when an
eagerly sought, complete democracy returns to Pakistan" (p. 72).

There is no evidence for the observation that in 1874 or thereabout India was declared
to be an empire of the British. If that is so, what was India before that dale? The
Governor General of India was also made the Viceroy in 1858 when the control of India
was transferred from the East India Company to the British Crown: since then the same
person was both Governor General and Viceroy. Viceroy means the deputy or
representative or agent of the King or the Queen. Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan was not, and
could not have been under natural dispensation, a leader of the Pakistan movement; he
died over forty years before the movement began. Nor did the Aga Khan play any part
in the movement for Pakistan because he was living in Switzerland between 1940 and
1945 and his asylum stipulated that he abstained from all political activity, local or
foreign. There were very few Muslims in the Indian National Congress in the years
1885-1905. The All India Muslim League was found in 1906, not in 1905. Jinnah was not
chosen by Pakistan as her first Governor General in 1947; Jinnah had chosen himself
before the country came into existence. The author of the book who was a Group
Captain in the Pakistan Air Force, ought to know that there can be at any one time only
one Army Chief. Then, how did the "Anny Chiefs" staged the 1977 coup?

Social Studies (History and Civics) West Pakistan Textbook Board, Lahore, 2nd ed. April
1970, pp. 131. Author: Abdul Ghafur Chaudhri, B.A. (Honours) (London), M.A., M.Sc.
(Alig.). Senior Editor, West Pakistan Textbook Board. Editor: Dr. Din Muhammad
Malik. M.A.. Ph.D. (Washington). Professor, Institute of Education and Research,
University of the Punjab, Lahore. Translator: Dr. Shaikh Asghar Ali, M.A., Ph.D.,
Director, Audio Visual Aids, Lahore. Print order: 5.000 copies.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 61



The Urdu original of this book has already been listed and annotated in the section on
Urdu books. Two points about this English version ought to be mentioned. The five
pages (pp. 64-68) of the Urdu original have been omitted here because they praised
Field Marshal Ayub Khan, and substituted with half a page (p. 46) or muted criticism of
the 1958 coup. Besides, Chapter 10 of the Urdu book has been dropped completely.

The message is clear and loud. The fortunes of the persons who rule the country and the
contents of the textbooks run in tandem. When Ayub Khan was in power in 1969 and
the Urdu book was published it was right and proper that the bulk of it should be in
praise of him. When, in 1970, he was no longer on the scene and this English translation
was published it was meet that the book should ignore him. All the books published
during Zia's years of power followed this practice. The conclusion is inescapable: the
students are not taught contemporary history but an anthology of tributes to current
rulers. The authors are not scholars or writers but courtiers.

The dishonesty of the author and the editor lies in their failure to notify these changes
in a preface or a foreword, which entitles us to hold them culpable.

Class 8

Social Studies, published by the Ilm-o-Aural Book Dept. Karachi, for the Sindh Textbook
Board. Hyderabad, 1st ed. January 1983, pp. 192. Author. S. Hamid Ali Jaffery.
Translated by Hanif Khan and Karim Baksh Channa. Print order 10,000 copies.

The revolt of 1857 is called "the War of Independence" (pp. 113-118); Iqbal in 1930
"conceived of separate Muslim states in the north-western and north-eastern parts of
India where they were in a majority" (p. 135); the Pakistan Resolution demanded that
"the north-western and the north-eastern parts of India where the Muslims were in a
majority should be joined together to constitute an independent and sovereign Muslim
State" (p.138); the break-up of Pakistan is described in four lines: In 1970 general
elections were held throughout the country. People's Party won majority of seats in the
National Assembly from West Pakistan; while Awami League won majority from East
Pakistan. In December 1971 the eastern part of the country was detached" (p. 150); the
account of the current political system in the country does not contain any reference to
Martial Law (pp. 150-154).

For correction of all these statements see Chapter 2.

Social Studies: Geography, History and Civics (Compulsory) for English Medium Schools,
Sindh Textbook Board, Hyderabad-Sindh, first ed. date of published [repeated twice],
June 1972, pp. 266. Authors: Mian Muhammad Aslam (Chapter 1 on Land and People)
and Dr. Abdul Hameed (the rest of the book). Revised by S.H.A. Jaffery, West Pakistan
Education Service, Class I (Senior) (retired). Translators: Chaudhri Abdul Ghafur, West

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 62



Pakistan Education Service, Class I, Senior (retired), Shaikh Abdul Haq, and
Muhammad Ahmad Khan. Published by Nafees Academy, Karachi, for the Board. Print
order. 3,000 copies.

The foreword makes the following statements: "Social Studies was [sic.] introduced as a
separate subject after 1960 and it replaced the subjects of history, geography and civics.
The object of introducing the new subject was to break the artificial boundaries between
history, geography and civics and to coordinate their different aspects in such a manner
that the students may understand their inter-dependence. Formerly books on social
studies were so written that different parts of the subject stood isolated and before long
they called for a revision. In view of its situation, the Education Department of the
Government of West Pakistan decided in 1966 that the syllabus for social studies should
be reorientated. The present volume has been written in accordance with the new
syllabus" (p. iii). "It may also be borne in mind that the object of making a study of this
subject is not only to give factual information to the students but also to make them
conscious of their future responsibilities and to instil in them a sense of solving the
problems of their country" (p. iv).

The preface is dated 6 March 1967, but it is attached to a book whose first edition
appeared in June 1972.

Only the first chapter deals with geography; the rest of the book treats of history,
current polities and administration. One point should be recorded right away instead of
being pointed out repeatedly in my commentary: throughout the book East Pakistan is
considered, referred to, mentioned and discussed as if it were still a part of Pakistan. No
notice has been taken of the terrible crisis which overwhelmed the country in December
1971 and broke it. As the book is meant to be studied during the two years of classes 9
and 10, it means that at least till 1974 the two highest classes of the school were not told
of the break-up of the country whose history they were studying.

Now for what the book tells us about history:

"Our homeland, Pakistan came into being in 1947. But its name had made history a few
years earlier. Some people consider Pakistan to be a new country. But this is not true."
(opening sentence of the part on history. p. 63).

Can anyone make out what the author is trying to convey in these four short sentences?
The advent of Islam in India reformed Hindu society. Shaikh Ali Hujveri, Khwaja
Muinuddin Chishti, Bahauddin Zakria, Bakiniar Kaki. Baba Farid Shakar Ganj,
Nizamuddin Auliya and other holy men "won over the people" (Hindus) of India.
"Their teachings dispelled many superstitions of the Hindus and reformed their bad
practices. Thereby Hindu religion of the olden times came to an end" (p. 73).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 63



I have not read any book on Hinduism or Indian history which tells me that the old
Hindu religion disappeared because of the efforts of these Muslim pirs and Sufis.

"During the Muslim rule, there was no set rule for ascension to the throne. It was not
obligatory that on the death of a king, the son must succeed the father. The Nobles and
the Ulema at the capital took part in the selection of a king" (p. 75).

There is absolutely no evidence in the history or contemporary chronicles of the Delhi
Sultanate and the Mughal Empire of the royal succession being determined by the
Ulema or the courtiers. In most cases it was the personality of the contender or heir
which settled the issue. It was not uncommon to see the rivals to the throne fighting
among themselves, murdering each other, and even killing the regnant father to make
room for the ambitious or the impatient claimant. Which Ulema did Aurungzeb consult
before dethroning and imprisoning his father and murdering his brothers?

There is one page on Haji Shariatullall of Bengal (108-109), and nearly four pages (110-
113) on Sayyid Ahmad Barelawi. In this the book follows the standard practice of
underplaying Bengali contributions to our history and religion.

On 1857: "The British call it a 'mutiny' and their opponents, 'rebels'. Pakistanis, on the
other hand, call it the War of Independence" (p. 113). The point is not argued. We
should recall: that Sayyid Ahmad Khan also called these fighters in the war of
independence baghis.

The Aligarh movement is given eight pages (120-127), the Deoband school two and a
half (128-130), and the Anjuman-i-Hamayat-i-Islam of Lahore another two and a half
(135-137). But only four pages are spared for the post-1857 Bengali movements.

The "Muslims got the right of separate electorates in 1906" (p. 134). They petitioned for
the concession in 1906 at Simla; it was given to them in 1909 under the Minto-Morley
reforms.

The Simla Deputation of 1906 demanded that the Muslims should be given
representation in elected institutions "according to their population" (p. 152). He is
wrong. The Deputation asked for weightage, that is more seats than the Muslims were
entitled to under population figures.

"The founder of the Congress was Allen Hume" (p. 154).

He was not. I have covered this point already.

In connection with the making of the 1919 reforms he makes no reference to the
Lucknow Pact (p. 169).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 64



The Lahore Resolution demanded "an independent state" (p. 178). For correction see
Chapter 2.

"The word Pakistan was first used for the Muslim homeland by Chaudhri Rahmat Ali
when he was a student at Cambridge" (p. 178). The sentence appears immediately after
an account of the Lahore Resolution, and therefore gives the natural impression that
Rahmat Ali invented the word for the state allegedly demanded by the Resolution. As
no date is given to Rahmat Ali's coinage the wrong conclusion gains firmer support.

"Pakistan came into existence on the 14th August, 1947" (p.185).

Read 15 August for 14, and see Chapter 2.

"Both wings of the country were treated equally in matters of economic development ....
East Pakistan was given a larger share in the allocations" (p. 197). This is the typical
West Pakistani claim and has no elements of truth in it See Chapter 2.

"The Parliamentary form of government requires two things to succeed ... organized
political parties ... [and] leaders of selfless and sacrificing nature" (p. 205).

This is a shallow and unperceptive remark coming from anyone, but it is anserine in the
mouth of a senior professor of political science. It makes two crass mistakes. First, it
pays no attention to factors like periodical and honest elections, free press, collective
responsibility of the cabinet, tolerance of minority views, willingness to resign if the
house shows its lack of confidence in the government, accountability of the government
to the house in daily operation, a strong and respected opposition, and absence of
ordinances and other executive fiats which bypass the parliament. Secondly, the two
pre-requisites about leadership mentioned by hint are equally necessary in the
presidential form of government.

"The new constitution which was promulgated on 23rd March 1956 could not be put
into operation" (p. 208).

In fact, it was in operation till 7 October 1958. For full details see Chapter 2.

Ayub Khan's abdication in favor of General Yahya Khan is mentioned (pp. 217-218), but
its illegality and its disastrous consequences for the future of the country are not even
hinted at.

The 1971 break-up of Pakistan is disposed of in six lines, without a word about the civil
war, its causes, the war with India, and the reasons for the secession of East Pakistan.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 65



As expected, keeping in view the date of the publication of the book, there is one
paragraph welcoming Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's rise to power and paying the standard
homage to the new government (pp. 218-219).

The 1956 constitution "was enforced on 23rd March" (p. 222); but on p. 208 above he has
declared that it was not put into operation. In which of the two statements will the
student put faith and repeat it in the examination script?

On the 1965 war: "When the Indian attack had been stopped and the Pakistan forces
began to advance, efforts were started by India for a cease-fire" (p. 259). The prescribed
Pakistani diet for the wretched students. See Chapter 2.

The "basic policy followed by our country in foreign affairs is to maintain friendly
relations with the three Great Powers, Russia, China and the U.S.A." (p. 265).

To put Russia and the U.S.A. in the same category vis a vis Pakistan's foreign relations is
a travesty of truth. For Russia read the Soviet Union.

Even the concerted labor of three professors (presumably of the English language) have
failed to give the book a style which does not jolt the reader on every page. It is
impossible to list all the howlers. A few examples will illustrate the ineptitude and
ignorance of the translators: Liaquat Ali "toured throughout the length and breadth of
the country" (p. 193): after Jinnah's death "there was a break-up of unity among the
political leaders of Pakistan" (p. 194): Ayub Khan "enforced a new constitution" (p. 224):
"the judges are appointed by the President but he consults also Governor" (p. 239): "in
1965, the relations of India and Pakistan once again deteriorated" (p. 256).

Classes 9-10

Pakistan Studies for Secondary Classes, Jamal Book Dept, Lahore. for the Punjab Textbook
Board, 1st ed. March 1987, pp. 214. Author: Professor Saeed Osman Malick. Supervisors:
Sibt-i-Hasan and Hifsa Javed. Produced by the Punjab Textbook Board with reference of
[sic] the Education Department, Government of the Punjab, Lahore, circular letter
NO.SO (c) Edu. 10-25-72 dated 15-7-75. Reviewed and approved by the National
Review Committee, Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Education and Provincial
Coordination. Print order: 5,000 copies.

The inside front cover of the book carries an appeal from the Chairman of the Board
addressed to the parents and students not to buy pirated editions of the Board's books
and an advice to the students "not to purchase any additional books other than those
prescribed by the Education Department and published by the Board". There are five
elementary grammatical errors in the appeal.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 66



I submit the following string of direct quotations from the book for the reader's
attention and amusement:

"Man's mission on earth is to follow and establish God's instructions to His commands"
(p. 21). The sense of the sentence has been buried deep under the debris of the
grammar,

"The Muslim rulers [of India] based their governments on Islamic principles .... Muslim
rulers introduced the principle of consultation in governmental matters. The rulers
consulted the nobles concerning secular affairs and religious scholars and Sufis with
regard to religious matters" (p. 9). Contemporary histories and narratives do not
support this claim.

"From Akbar's rule onward, the standard of the Muslim army went down .... the
commanders became so ease-loving that they would go to the front in palki (cradle)" (p.
12).

"The British came to power in the sub-continent after the failure of the War of
Independence, 1857" (p. 12). The British had exercised power in most parts of India long
before 1857. Has the author never heard of the Regulating Acts? The British even
controlled Delhi since 1803 and gave a pension to the Mughal emperor.

"Shah Waliullah's most well-known book is Hijjatullah-hil Baligha" (p. 16). For "most
well-known" read best known. The book's correct title is Hajjat Allah al Baligha.

"Nawab Abdul Latif carried on Sir Syed's movement in Bengal" (p. 20). The Nawab did
not do any such thing. His movement flowed from an independent Bengali initiative
and owed nothing to Sir Sayyid Ahmed Khan. Why does every author trace all Muslim
movements back to Aligarh?

"The Simla Delegation demanded separate representation for Muslims" (p. 23). Read
Deputation for "Delegation". It also demanded weightage, besides separate electorates.

"The [Khilafat] movement was at its peak in the sub-continent when Mustafa Kamal
Ataturk declared Turkey a republic and put an end to the Caliphate" (p. 24). The
movement had passed its peak two years before the Khilafat was abolished. On 27
February 1924 Vasyf Bey moved in the Grand Assembly that the Khilafat be abolished.
On 1 March Ataturk supported the proposal. On 2 March the proposal was endorsed by
the People's Party. On 3 March the Assembly adopted it. Sultan Abdul Majid, the last
Khalifa, left Constantinople at dawn on 4 March, arrived in Territel in Switzerland on 7
March, and thereafter lived in Switzerland till his death. As from 1 July he accepted a
pension of £300 a month from the Nizam of Hyderabad.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 67



"Iqbal wanted a separate State for them [the Muslims of India]" (p. 29). He did not. See
Chapter 2 for details.

"It is my wish that the Punjab, the Frontier Province, Sindh and Baluchistan be
combined so as to make one State — The setting-up of a North Western Muslim State
(of the entire subcontinent) is the destiny of at least the Muslims of the north west
regions" (p. 29).

[This is supposed to be a quotation from Iqbal's Allahabad address].

"The Indian leaders could not come to any agreement at the Round Table Conference).
The British Government. therefore introduced a new Constitutional Act — The
Government of India Act, 1935. The Act gave more powers to the provinces" (p. 30). The
Government of India Act, not the "Constitutional Act", was the result of six years (1928-
34) of British-Indian inquiries, talks, collaboration, deliberations, discussions and
conferences.

"Many Muslim leaders in the past had supported the concept of a separate State for the
Muslims. Allama Iqbal was the most prominent among them. Chaudhri Rahmat Ali had
even named this State as PAKISTAN. However, the Muslim League made a formal
demand for an independent State for the Muslims of the Sub-continent in 1940. A
federation of united India was no longer acceptable. The Pakistan Resolution was
passed by the Muslim League in a meeting held at Minto Park (now Iqbal Park) in
Lahore on the 23rd March, 1940. It demanded ... an independent State" (pp. 31-32).
There are 4 factual mistakes and one vital omission in the passage. See Chapter 2.

"The elected Muslim members of the Central and Provincial Assemblies held a
Convention al Delhi in 1946" (p. 32). It should be Muslim League members, not Muslim
members.

Radcliffe gave to India "Muslim majority areas like Ferozepur. Jullundher and
Gurdaspur" (p. 33). Jullundher was solidly Hindu-majority district. Only one tidbit in
Firozepur and two tahsils in Gurdaspur had a Muslim majority and were allotted to
India.

"The East Pakistan Tragedy in 1970 ..." (p. 36). Read 1971 for 1970.

In 1970 East Pakistan "broke away from the mother country" (p. 38). East Pakistan broke
away in December 1971, not in 1970. Was West Pakistan a "mother country" of East
Pakistan, though a majority of the country's population lived in East Pakistan? It was
such fatuous proprictorial arrogance that led to the break-up. Pakistanis learn nothing
even from recent historical calamities.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 68



"General Muhammad Yahya Khan, the then Commander-in-Chief of Pakistan Army,
succeeded him [Ayubl" (p. 45). General Yahya Khan did not succeed Ayub Khan; he
usurped Ayub's place through force and blackmail, and the fact should be told to the
students. They should also be told that on taking over power Yahya called himself Chief
Martial Law Administrator and Commander-in-Chief not the President of the country.
It was only after a few weeks that his advisers in the Foreign Office persuaded him to
add the title of President to his other honors and offices and ranks; were he to refuse, it
might create problems of international recognition of the new regime. The General
condescended to accept the office of the Presidency of the Republic. An eye-opening
reminder of the debasement of the Presidency of the Republic by Ayub Khan and his
army. The Generals preferred their rank to the highest office in the country!

"In December 1970, Pakistan's first general elections were held under the Legal
Framework Order (LFO) for electing people's representatives to frame a new
constitution. After the elections. unfortunately, the country fell a victim to political crisis
and foreign conspiracies. Pakistan's neighbor Bharat attacked Pakistan. The result was
the separation of East Pakistan in December, 1971" (p. 46). For details see Chapter 2.

In 1977 "the Opposition Parties alleged the ruling Peoples Party for rigging in the
elections. It created a great resentment and the Opposition Parties launched a
movement against the government. The law and order situation was totally out of
control. The army took over and imposed Martial Law in the country on July 5. 1977.
Federal and provincial governments, and the legislative bodies were dissolved. The
Constitution of 1973 was partially held in abeyance. The President and the Chief Martial
Law Administrator (CMLA) nominated the members of Majlis-i-Shura in December,
1981. The first session of this body was held in Islamabad in January, 1982. The Chief
Martial Law Administrator and the President of Pakistan, General Muhammad Ziaul
Huq, promised on 12th August 1982, that there shall be complete Islamic Democratic
System in the country by March, 1985. As a step towards this goal, the President
secured a vote of confidence in his favor through a nation-wide referendum held in
December 1984. After that, elections to the National and Provincial Assemblies were
held in February 1985. Elections to the Senate and for the special seats for women and
minorities etc were completed in March, 1985 and this finalized the composition of the
Parliament. In the mean-time, the Constitution of 1973, with some amendments was
reinstated. General Muhammad Ziaul Huq took the oath as elected President of
Pakistan on 23rd March, 1985. The same day, the Prime Minister also took the oath, and
in this way Islamic Democratic System started functioning in the country" (pp. 57-58).
For a full discussion of the Zia coup and his misrule see Chapter 2 below.

"... the Muslims came to this country bringing with them a clean and elegant culture
and civilization. The Hindus were influenced by the Islamic civilization. The Hindus are
indebted to Muslim culture and civilization today" (p. 172). What is a "clean" culture?

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 69



Was the Indian or Hindu culture "unclean"? As for the borrowing, didn't the Muslims
also take much from the Hindu way of life, which is a part of today's Pakistani culture?

"Urdu is the only language, which, with minor variations, is spoken and understood in
the subcontinent right from Peshawar (Pakistan) to Ras Kumari (Bharat) even today" (p.
175).

"The syntax of Urdu language is such that the words of other languages included in it
do not appear alien. Instead, they look as if they originally belonged to Urdu" (p. 176).

"Urdu literature has a vast treasure of poetry and prose and more is being added to it
daily. It is quite suited to become the official language" (p. 176).

"It is necessary that stories, dramas, songs and essays about every region of Pakistan
should be written in Urdu so that the people of these regions may get satisfaction in
reading them" (italicized in the original) (p. 180). For the vacuity of his claims for Urdu
see below Chapters 2 and 3.

"Before the creation of Pakistan, Saudi Arabia had great sympathy for the freedom
movement of the Muslims in India" (p. 204). The students are entitled to a proof and
some examples of this "great sympathy". Abject flattery of a country which backed
General Zia's illegal government should have no place in a textbook, in fact in any book.
The author was the Head of Department of Political Science at the Government College,
Lahore, when he wrote this book, and holds a Master's degree from the London School
of Economics. This egregious book has also been prescribed by the Sindh Textbook
Board as a textbook for secondary school examination within the areas covered by the
Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, Hyderabad, and the Board of
Secondary Education, Karachi. Presumably it was on the strength of the authorship of
this book that Professor Malick was appointed, in January 1990, on the Board of
Advisors of the Heritage School System of Lahore, and after retirement from
government service was made principal of the Lahore College of Arts and Sciences, a
private English-medium elite institution.

Pakistan Studies, IX and X: Solved Papers, Short Answers, Descriptive Answers, Objective,
Azad Publishers, Karachi, n.d., pp.128.

"Iqbal was the first important public figure who gave the idea of a separate Muslim
State from the platform of the Muslim League" (p. 11); Iqbal "did Bar-at-Law and went
to Germany for his Ph.D. Degree" (p. 55); "in fact, it was Allama Iqbal who gave the idea
of separate homeland for Muslims of the subcontinent", and his 1930 Allahabad address
"contains the first conception of the two-nation theory and demand for a separate home-
land for the Indian Muslims. Allama Iqbal further explained his point in third Round
Table Conference, in 1932" (pp. 55-56); Jinnah "went to England for Bar-at-Law" (p. 56);

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 70



the Pakistan Resolution "stated that the north-western and north-eastern areas of south-
Asia which had a majority of Muslim population should be funned independent state"
(p. 57); "it may be said that Pakistan represents the true picture of Islamic Culture" (p.
98); "Urdu is the national language of Pakistan and an important language of the world.
Urdu got its currency from the beginning of the Muslim rule. The chief credit for its
popularity goes to mystics and saints, who wrote in Urdu ... by the advent of the British
it had been adopted by the Hindus and the Muslims alike" (p. 98); the causes of the
popularity of Urdu are summed up as follows: "it has great power of mixing up with
other languages"; "it is spoken and understood all over the country"; "saints, Sufis and
poets had written a lot in Urdu. So it had become popular among the Muslim masses
who am very religious-minded"; "various parts of the country claim their own province
as the cradle bed of Urdu" (pp. 98-99).

Iqbal did not utter a word about Pakistan at the Round Table Conference. All the
Muslim mystics and saints wrote in Arabic or Persian or in both languages, not in Urdu.
If Pakistan is a true picture of Islamic culture, this culture should be given a new
meaning and a new definition: there must be a limit to which the students can he made
fools of. Other mistakes in the paragraph are corrected below in Chapter 2.

Classes 11-12

Pakistan Studies (Compulsory) for Intermediate Classes, published by Sh. Shaukat Ali
and Sons, Karachi, September 1983. pp. 112. Prepared under the supervision of the
Ministry of Education, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad, Approved for the
Departments of Education of the Punjab, Sindh, NWFP, Baluchistan, Federal Area and
liberated Kashmir vide Federal Ministry of Education, Government of Pakistan.
Islamabad, Notification No. F. 11-16/8 I -HST, dated 2nd November, 1981, as the sole
textbook for intermediate classes. Authors: Dr. Safdar Mahmood. Dr. Aminullah
Vaseer, Saeeduddin Ahmad Dar. Iqbal Bakht and Dr. Azhar Hameed. Editor: Dr. Azhar
Harmed.

We are told by the Education Secretary of the Government of Pakistan in the Foreword
that "this textbook on Pakistan Studies which is a faithful translation of the Urdu edition
produced earlier by the Education Ministry has been published because there was a
persistent demand for an English version" (p. v).

"In his famous statement (Allahabad 1930) Allama Iqbal strongly advocated the creation
of an Islamic state in order to maintain the separate identity of the Muslims of the
subcontinent" (p. 4); the Indian National Congress was founded by "Lord Hume" in
1885 (p. 27); Bankim Chandra Chatterji's novel Anandamath is called "Anand Sukh" (p.
28): in 1930 "Allama

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 71



Iqbal emphasized that it was essential for the Muslims of the subcontinent, if they
desired to live in accordance with their cultural traditions and social values, to establish
a separate state for themselves" (p. 36); Rahmat Ali "proposed 'Pakistan' as the name of
the country which was to be formed" by the Lahore Resolution; which clearly implies
that Rahmat Ali did so after 1940 (p. 39): "the Muslims of the subcontinent waged their
last war for freedom in 1857" (p. 82); "the origin of Pakistani languages can be traced to
religious topics, for Islam serves as the fountain-head of all Pakistani literature" (p. 85);
"historically it [Urdu] is the language of the Muslims of the subcontinent and the
symbol of our national identity ... [it] is understood and spoken in all parts of the
country" (p. 86); the 1971 break-up is described like this: "By early 1971 the law and
order condition in East Pakistan had deteriorated seriously. Bharat, taking advantage of
the situation, infiltrated her agents who provided arms to saboteurs and anti-state
elements who were trained and financially assisted to step up their efforts. Not
contented at that, Bharat attacked East Pakistan in November, 1971. The Pakistan
Armed Forces, despite internal communications being cut off and no reinforcements
reaching them from West Pakistan, waged a gallant struggle. As the odds were
overwhelmingly against them, they were asked in mid-December to lay down their
arms and cease all resistance' (p. 97-98).

Hume was not a peer, and he did not establish the Indian National Congress. For other
inaccuracies and oddities see Chapter 2.

History of Pakistan by Professor Rallullah Shehab, published by Sanger-Meel
Publications, Lahore, 1989, pp. 262. Actually this is a new edition, but the fact is not
mentioned, nor are the dates of the previous editions given.

The author teaches Islamic Studies or Arabic at the most prestigious college of Lahore.
The book is used by the better groups of intermediate students and also by some degree
students.

"Many of the European and Hindu writers have tried to paint him [Aurangzeb] as a
religious zealot, which he was not. He ... followed most of the policies which were
really originated during the reign of Akbar . . . . Even his enemies admit that he was
tolerant, large hearted and accommodating" (p. 33): a "War of Independence" was
fought in 1857, and "during the period following the War of Independence, the British
remained nervous" (p. 63): at the same time the army fighting the British is referred to
as "rebel soldiers" (p. 69); the name of the Secretary of State for India 1917 is misspelt as
"Montague" (p. 78): the Round Table Conferences were held in "1913" (p. 78); the
Pakistan Resolution was passed on 23 March 1949 (p. 83): Sir Sayyid Ahmed Khan laid
"the first brick of the foundation of Pakistan" when the founded the Aligarh College (p.
83), and "this school is rightly considered as a first-brick laid in the foundation of
Pakistan" (p. 88); Iqbal gave his Allahabad address on "29th December, 1931", and a
passage from the address is wrongly quoted (p. 92); in 1860 "Urdu was the language of

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 72



the Subcontinent" (p. 102); at Allahabad Iqbal "discussed at length the scheme for the
partition of the sub-continent, a resolution to this effect was also passed in that session
of the All India Muslim League" (p. 113): "the British Government under the
Government of India Act of 1935 granted self-govt. to the people of the Subcontinent"
(p. 113); the Lucknow Pact was "a landmark in the political history of the Sub-continent"
(p. 117): the Simon Commission "was boycotted by both the Congress and the Muslim
League" (p. 118); the Nehru Report was submitted "in 1926" (p. 118); in 1930 Iqbal
"demanded for a separate homeland for the Muslims of the Sub-continent" (p. 122); the
Lahore Resolution demanded "a separate Muslim State comprising of North-Western
and Eastern Zones of India where the Muslims were in majority" (p. 124).

Certain facts must be brought to the notice of the author. Is it or is it not sate that
Aurangzeb Alamgir destroyed Hindu temples, enforced a harsh version of the Islamic
law of one particular school (the Hanafi), dispossessed and incarcerated his father,
murdered his brothers, proscribed all liberal thinking, banned music and painting, and
drained off the military and financial resources of the empire in trying to liquidate the
Muslim Shia kingdoms of South India while abandoning western and northern India to
Marhatta, Jat and Sikh depredations? In what possible sense was he tolerant, large-
hearted and accommodating? It is impossible for any historian to notice the slightest
resemblance between his policies and those of Akbar. Read Montagu for "Montague".
The Round Table Conference met in 1930-32, not in 1913. Iqbal's Allahabad address was
given in 1930, not in 1931. The Government of India Act of 1935 did not give India self-
government it established a close type federal system in which the central government.
controlled by a non-elected and unaccountable Governor General, was to hold the
provinces in leash (though in fact the federal pan of the Act was never implemented).
The Nehru Report was issued in 1928, not 1926. For the correction of other mistakes see
Chapter 2.

The Khilafat agitation died out in 1922 when the Sultan of Turkey was deposed (p. 170);
in 1926 the Muslim League and the Congress decided to draft a constitution for India
"in reply to the humiliation heaped on India by the appointment of Simon Commission"
(p. 170); the Indian National Congress is called the "All India National Congress" (p.
171); the Pakistan Resolution was "passed on 23rd March" (p. 172); "an All-India Muslim
League legislators convention was held at Delhi on 9th April 1949" (p. 202).

The Muslim League did not join the Congress in drafting a constitution for India in
1926. The All India Muslim League did not boycott the Simon Commission; only a part
of it under Jinnah did so. The Nehru Report was submitted in 1928, not in 1926. See also
Chapter 2 for more corrections.

"The present Martial Law Government ... decided to enforce honestly the Islamic system
of government as promised by the Quaid-i-Azam to the nation" (p. 207); "June 27, 1947.
Pakistan State takes its birth" (p. 211); "July 19, 1947. Two free Dominions are born" (p.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 73



212); the NWFP is called "North-Western province" (p. 212); Yahya Khan postponed the
National Assembly session scheduled to be held in Dacca on "March 1, 1970" (p. 214).

Was the Islamic system which was enforced by General Zia the one promised by Jinnah
to the nation? Can any speech or writing of Jinnah be quoted in support of this
contention? If for a moment we assume that Zia's Islam was Jinnah's goal, did the father
of the nation want that goal to be imposed on the people against their will by a military
ruler who had usurped power and had no sanction, legal or moral, for the ways in
which he turned his whims into ordinances? Pakistan took its birth on 15 August, not 27
June. The two Dominions of India and Pakistan were horn on 15 August, not on 19 July.

"Criticism of the Supreme Court's decision which upheld the assumption of power by
Ayub Khan on the doctrine of an effective revolution thereby legitimizing force
similarly fails to take into account the political culture of the country and the shifting
balance of forces in which the courts operated" (p. 221); "it was General Yahya Khan's
tragic lot to preside over the disintegration of Pakistan to which his folly had made a
signal contribution. His ignominious fall from power in the aftermath of the disastrous
war with India in 1971 paved the way for the rise of the People's Party to power" (p.
222); Bhutto proved to be a dictator and showed it in the 1977 elections. "The
smoldering discontent found a powerful outburst in the general election of 1977 and
turned into an extraordinary mass movement of pretest precipitating the imposition of
Martial Law on July 5, 1977" (p. 223); this Martial Law "by contrast was the grim deposit
of the clash between the political party in power and the parties in opposition which
had brought the country to the brink of a civil war" (p. 223).

Does the political culture of the country demand from the Supreme Court that it ratifies
and upholds every military overthrow of a constitutional movement? For the break-up
of 1971 and the Zia coup of 1977 see Chapter 2.

"The regional languages, Punjabi, Pashto, Sindhi and Baluchi, are the products of the
same cultural factors and ideologies which brought Urdu into existence. This ensures to
a large extent the cultural unity of Pakistan, if by culture we do not mean a drab
uniformity of language and emotional pattern" (p. 226); "Urdu is understood all over
the country; in fact it was the lingua franca of the Sub-continent and may perhaps even
now be serving India as such. Next to Urdu, Punjabi is understood and spoken over
most parts of the country" (p. 227); "many games and sports are played in Pakistan
which reflect our cultural identity. These games include wrestling, hockey, cricket, foot-
ball, squash, and kabbadi" (p. 228).

According to the 1981 census of Pakistan, Punjabi is spoken by the largest segment of
the population of the country and Urdu by 7.60 per cent of the people. In what way do
the games of cricket and football reflect our cultural identity? We borrowed and learnt

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 74



both from the British. By the same logic. the English language and Western dress should
also reflect our cultural identity. Do they? For other points see Chapter 2.

One foil chapter (pp. 80-88) deals with Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan and the Aligarh
movement and there are references to them in other chapters also, but there is no
mention of the part played by Bengal in the nationalist or the Pakistan movement.

The bibliographies given at the end of each chapter and the general bibliography
appended at the end of the book are extremely defective. For example, J.M. Keynes's
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money is said to have been published in
1957. Books don't carry their full titles, nor is it indicated whether the person named as
the author is the writer or the editor. The most astonishing statement is that D.P.
Singhal's A History of the Indian People is the work of a British historian; and passages
from this book are quoted in extenso in chapter after chapter to prove that a "British
historian" is critical of British rule (pp. 41, 64, 71, 73). The author is not aware that Dr.
Singhal was an Indian Hindu scholar.

The English used in the writing of this book may be illustrated by a few examples
chosen at random: "Many of the problems he had to encounter, were brewing for some
time" (p. 33); "As a result he did not adopted it as the official code of the empire" (p. 33);
"throughout his life Sahu acknowledged his greatness and always visited his grave to
pay respect and indebtedness. This even negates the propaganda that he converted the
Hindus to Islam under threat of power" (p. 33); "ministers took over the reign of the
governments" (p. 33); "the struggle for Pakistan culminated in the establishment to
Pakistan in August 1947" (p. 113); and "it is unfortunate that the Quaid soon parted us
on September It, 1948" (p. 196).

Degree Level

General Ziaul Huq's military regime decided that a course called "Mutala'a-i-Pakistan"
should be devised and that it should be taught in all colleges (arts, science, law,
engineering, technology, medicine, etc.), and no boy or girl would be deemed to have
passed his or her degree examination until he or she had been examined, and declared
successful, in this course. A very special textbook for this course was prepared by the
joint effort of several committees and sub-committees of the Federal Ministry of
Education, the University Grants Commission, the Allama Iqbal Open University and a
few other official bodies.

In the preparation of the course advice was given by Professor Muhammad Ismail Sethi,
Member of the University Grants Commission, and Dr. Sher Muhammad Zaman, a
former Vice-Chancellor of the Allama Iqbal Open University. The late Dr. Abdul
Hamid, a former Director of the Research Society of Pakistan, was the guiding spirit in
the meetings of the Course Committee and the Course Team. Dr. Ahmad

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 75



Muhayyuddin, the then Vice-Chancellor of the Allama Iqbal Open University, also
played an important part in the preparation of the book.

The Course Team was as follows:

Coordinator Dr. Azhar Hameed.

Members Professor Sharif-al-Mujahid (Director, Quaid-i-Azam Academy,
Karachi).

Dr. Muni ruddin Chughtai (Head of the Department of Political
Science, University of the Punjab, Lahore).

Dr. Abdul Hamid (Former Director, Research Society of Pakistan.
Lahore).

Dr. Safdar Mahmood (Deputy Director General, Pakistan Sports
Board, Islamabad).

Khwaja Saeeduddin Dar (Head of Department of International
Relations, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad).

Professor laved Iqbal Syed.

Mrs. Muzaffri Qureshi.

Abdul Hamid Rathor.

Dr. Muhammad Siddique Khan Shibli.

Jalil Qazi.

Course Editor Dr. Azhar Hameed.

Senior Editor Bashir Ahmad.

The chapters of the book with their authors are as follows:

1. The Pakistan Ideology by Dr. Azhar Hameed (revised by Professor Sharif-al-
Mujahid) (pp. 1-28).

2. The Land of Pakistan by Dr. Azhar Hameed (revised by Dr. Muhanimad Sa'd)
(pp. 29-56).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 76



3. The Shaping and Evolution of the Muslim Society in the Subcontinent by
Professor Muhammad Aslam (revised by Khwaja Saeeduddin Dar) (pp. 57-80).

4. The Pakistan Movement by Dr. Muniruddin Chughtai (revised by Dr. Safdar
Mahmood) (pp. 31-32).

5. The Struggle for Pakistan by Muhammad Jahangir Alam (revised by Dr. Inamul
Huq) (pp. 133-168).

6. The Role of the Ulema, Religious Leaders, Writers, Journalists, Students and
Ladies in the Pakistan Movement by Hakim Aftab Hasan Qarshi (revised by
Professor Muhammad Aslam) (pp. 169-208).

7. The Establishment of Pakistan by Dr. Azhar Hameed (revised by Dr. Rafique
Afzal) (pp. 209-238).

8. Efforts for the Implementation of the Islamic System in Pakistan by Professor
Zakria Sajid (revised by Karam Hydari) (pp.239-272).

9. Pakistan and the Islamic World by Khwaja Saceduddin Dar (revised by Dr.
Rafique Maul) (pp. 273-302).

This book was published by Izhar Sons, Lahore. for the Allama Iqbal Open University
under the title of Mutala'a-i-Pakistan (Compulsory), n.d. The second edition carries a
Foreword by Dr. Ghulam Ali Allana, Vice-Chancellor of the Atlama Iqbal Open
University, in which we are told that the text being now presented has been completely
revised, corrected and supplemented. The book also includes the Foreword of the first
edition by Dr. Ahmad Mohayyuddin, the Vice-Chancellor of the Allama Iqbal Open
University at the time when the first edition was published: it claims that the ablest
teachers and experts of the country cooperated in the preparation of the book.

The historical knowledge contained in this book is reflected in the following statements
ad assertions:

In 1930 at Allahabad Iqbal presented the idea of a partition of India "with great clarity
and detail", Foreword by Dr. Ghulam Ali Allana (p. ix).

On Iqbal and the idea of Pakistan see Chapter 2.

"The British were extremely proud of their power and wealth and their racial arrogance
was great. They tried every weapon against the Muslims, put restraints on writing and
speech, deprived them of their rights to employment and tried their best to keep them

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 77



educationally backward .... In short, throughout their rule the British treated the
Muslims as step-children" (p. 8).

This is a gross exaggeration. The Muslims of India (along with other Indians) were more
free to write and speak their mind under the British than Pakistanis have been since
1947 under their own governments. The British extended much help and patronage to
the MAO College, Aligarh, and to the All India Muhammadan Educational Conference
which was founded by Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan. In Bengal the Calcutta Muhammadan
Literary Society received official aid and help.

"The Muslims never in their heart accepted British rule" (p. 9).

Really! Then, how did they persuade themselves to live under this rule for nearly two
hundred years, and some of their leaders and rulers fought on their side against other
Muslim kingdoms and principalities and unties? And, apart from some exceptional
times like the post-Mutiny decade and the Khilafat movement years. they lived happily
and cooperated willingly with the Government. In fact, loyalty permeated Muslim
publics and especially the Muslim League. The balanced historian should not feel
embarrassed in admitting these facts of history. From 1906 to 1947 the great majority of
the leaders of the Muslim League, the Bengal United Party, the various Sindh Muslim
parties, the Punjab Unionist Party and of course all the Muslim groups in the United
Provinces, were Nawabs, Knights, Khan Bahadurs, ta'aluqdars, zamindars, pensioners,
darbaris, business magnates of Madras.

Bombay and Calcutta, and prominent urban professionals with close links with the
establishment. Look at the Muslim members of the Viceroy's Executive Council, Muslim
delegates to the Round Table Conferences, member of the Muslim League working
Committees and of the All India Muslim Conference Executive Boards and other such
representative bodies, and the commoners are thin on the ground. Iqbal wrote a
fawning elegy on the death of Queen Victoria, in the 1914-18 war he participated in the
recruitment meetings, composed a verse eulogizing Sir Michael O'Dwyer, the masterful
Governor of the Punjab, and ended up as a Knight. Before him Sayyid Ahmad Khan
had stood firmly against the "mujahidin" of the "War of Independence". Even the revered
Ulema of Nadwa indulged in such base flattery on the occasion of the opening ceremony
of their dar-ul-ulum that the reader of the official proceedings may well believe that
these were the officials of the Church of England and not the doctors of Islam who were
making these speeches. The Aga Khan was a great friend of the British Empire, and
made no secret of his feelings or his attachment. There were many like hint in Muslim
public life.

The play of loyalty is too pervasive a feature of Muslim politics to be swept under the
carpet. Original sources of history show it up. Contemporary newspapers publish its
public expressions. Books are full of it. Scholars are aware of it. It is only the

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 78



government and its paid minions who act like ostriches. That would not matter much
but for the fact that the government is telling lies to the students and thus standing
between them and tom history.

"This country is an overwhelmingly Muslim country and was created on the basis of an
ideology, and this ideology is the Islamic religion of the Muslims. This is the generally
understood meaning of the ideology of Pakistan" (p. 16, this is a literal translation of the
Urdu sentence which is not clear).

Even a dullard could not have written a more Mane sentence. Ideology equals Islam,
then why indulge in tautology? The ideology of Pakistan is "the Islam religion of the
Muslims". The apparent meaning being that the Muslims adhere to some other religion
also besides Islam!

Among the persons who are listed as the founders of the ideology of Pakistan are
Mawlana Mahmud Hasan and Mawlana Abdul Ala Maududi; it is not even mentioned
that they were opposed to the Muslim League and Maududi was against the creation of
Pakistan (pp. 19-20).

For a detailed comment on this see Chapter 2.

"Allama Iqbal was the first thinker to offer the idea of a separate Muslim state in the
subcontinent on positive and ideological grounds" (p. 22).

Iqbal was not the first thinker to do so. He did not offer the idea of a separate state in
1930. When later in 1937 he argued in favor of separatism he did so on religious and
economic grounds, not on "ideological" grounds.

The section on Muslim revival in India confines the treatment to Shah Waliullah, the
Deoband school, the University of Aligarh, the Nadwat-ul-Ulema, the Jamia Millia
Islamia of Delhi, and the Anjuman-i-Hamayat-i-Islam of Lahore. No person or
institution from Bengal is mentioned (pp. 75-79).

The events of 1857 are referred to as "the War of Independence" (p. 90).

On this see Chapter 2.

The Lucknow Pact is presented as a victory of the Muslim League, but no mention is
made of the fact that the Muslims of Bengal and the Punjab lost their right to rule the
provinces (pp. 95-96).

The Lucknow Pact is fully discussed below in Chapter 2.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 79



It was Mawlana Muhammad Ali who convened the All-Parties Muslim Conference in
Delhi on 1 January 1929 (p. 99). For the correction of this see Chapter 2.

"From 1930 onwards the idea of dividing India on the basis of Hindu-majority and
Muslim-majority areas and the creation of a separate Muslim state began to gain
popularity. At this time an open expression of this idea was give by Allama Iqbal in his
Allahabad address" (p. 102).

In 1890 Abdul Halim Sharar demanded that "India should be divided into Hindu
provinces and Muslim provinces" (p. 102). For "provinces" read districts.

"Some Muslim students who were living in England contacted Iqbal during the Round
Table Conference and with his advice they, led by Rahmat Ali, started in early 1933 a
Pakistan National Movement" (p. 105).

We have no firm evidence of such a meeting having taken place. Rahmat Ali did not
start his movement under Iqbal's advice: he could not have done it because his plan of a
Pakistan was totally different from Iqbal's proposal of a large Muslim province inside
the Indian federation.

After the 1937 elections "in the Muslim-majority provinces the local Muslim leaders
joined the non-Muslims in their own interests and formed provincial parties" (p. 109).

Where was this done? Which parties were formed in this way? In the absence of any
information in the book no commentary is possible.

The Pakistan Resolution was passed "amid shouts of joy and congratulations and with
unanimity" on 23 March 1940 (p. 117). Read 24 March for 23 March. See also Chapter 2.

"The Unionist Party was founded in 1924. It was a party of big landholders .... It created
a spirit of hatred in the province which continued till the creation of Pakistan" (p. 119).

It was not a party of men of broad acres. Among its founders and leading lights were
Iqbal, Shaikh Abdul Qadir, Muhammad Zafrullah Khan, Mian Fazl-i-Husain and Mian
Abdul Hayee. None of these was a landlord, big or small. Among whom and against
whom did the party create hatred? Not against the British, under whom it served. Not
against the Hindus and Sikhs, who were a part of it. Not against the Muslim League.
which courted it and entered into a pact with it. Against the people, who voted for it. It
is a crazy statement as it stands.

In 1890 Abdul Halim Sharar wrote in his journal that "the subcontinent should be
divided into Hindu and Muslim provinces" (P. 139).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 80



Read districts for "provinces".

"On 23 March 1940 the Muslim League adopted a resolution asking for the creation of a
separate state for the Muslims" (p. 140).

Read 24 March for 23 March. Read "independent states" in place of a "a separate state".

"In its annual session held in Madras in April 1941 the All India Muslim League
amended its aims and objects so that now its goal was fixed as the establishment of a
separate mamlakat for the Muslims of the subcontinent" (p. 141).

If the Muslim League wrote the Lahore Resolution into its constitution at the Madras
session, as it actually did, the goal could not have been fixed as "the establishment of a
separate mamlakat" because such a goal found no mention in the Resolution.

In the history of the NWFP the Khudai Khidmatgars are not mentioned (pp. 145-146).

The Sindh Provincial Muslim League Conference met under Jinnah in Karachi "in
October 1936" (p. 156).

Read 1938 for 1936.

"At the beginning of this century the great philosopher Allama Muhammad Iqbal gave
the Muslims the lesson of freedom and Islamic identity and then suggested the creation
of a separate mamlakat as a political solution of the problems of the subcontinent" (p.
160).

There is no evidence at all that early in this century Iqbal suggested the creation of a
separate Muslim state.

"On 23 March 1940 ... Pakistan was declared to be the goal of the Muslims" (p. 161).

Read 24 for 23 March. The word "Pakistan" does not appear in the Lahore Resolution.

"Chaudhry Rahmat Ali was basically a man of letters and journalist" (p. 184).

Not even remotely is this true. He created no literature and worked for or edited no
newspaper or journal. He was a political thinker and a pamphleteer.

Mian Kafayet Ali's book Confederacy of India is referred to as Wafq-i-Hind (p. 184).

Fazi Karim Khan Duman is called "Farzand Khan" (p. 185). The Eastern Times, the
Muslim newspaper of Lahore, is called Western Times (p. 180).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 81



The account of the Hindu-Muslim riots and killings of 1947 is blatantly one sided, and
all the blame is put on the non-Muslims (pp. 233-234).

"One aspect of the history of Pakistan is not enviable: it has not achieved political
stability and till now, in spite of the experiments of parliamentary system, presidential
system and military rule, we as a nation have not found agreement on the system
suitable for an ideological state like Pakistan. We have also not decided on the political
system which can help us in the implementation of Islamic sharia and Islamic way of
life. But it is a matter of satisfaction that all sections of the country, despite their
differences, are unanimous on the point that Pakistan was achieved in the name of
Islam, and therefore it must exist as a fortress of the Islamic system" (pp. 247-248).

There is a sharp contradiction between the contents of the first seven lines of the
passage and those of the remaining four lines. A good try at stupefying even the
intelligent students.

"The Constitution of 1956 had just become operative when differences arose among the
political parties of the country. At this juncture, in October 1958, General Muhammad
Ayub Khan imposed Martial Law and saved the administration from disorder" (p. 259).

For "just" read two and a half years. Ayub Khan saved the country from democracy, not
from disorder.

"In 1969 after disturbances and political disorder in the country General Muhammad
Yahya Khan took the reins of government in his own hands" (p. 260).

Yahya Khan usurped the President's powers, though with Ayub's consent (which was
obtained by use of force and threats).

"In the elections of December 1970 Mujibur Rahman's Awami League won a success in
East Pakistan on the basis of its 4-point programme. The Pakistan People's Party won 87
seats, and the Awami League won 167 seats. The movement for the secession of East
Pakistan from Pakistan received powerful support when the Indian Army, on the
pretext of coming to the aid of the Mukti Bahini. invaded East Pakistan and forced the
Pakistan Army to surrender in Dacca" (p. 261).

The election results are confused up. The first sentence refers to East Pakistan, the
second to the centre; but the difference is not made clear. For the secession of East
Pakistan see Chapter 2 below.

"The P.P.P. government failed to establish an Islamic system in the country, did not
treat the provinces equally, and created a feeling of deprivation in the NWFP and

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 82



Baluchistan. For these reasons a movement was started in 1977, which resulted in a
change of government" (p. 262). Throughout the book Bhutto is not mentioned.

The 1977 anti-government movement was not started for these reasons, but as a protest
against alleged rigging in the elections.

"In March 1977-all the opposition parties joined together and adopted the Nizam-i-
Mustafa as their election manifesto .... During the election campaign because of the
awakening of the sentiment of faith [iman], the movement later started by the
opposition became a revolutionary movement. Thus it was proved that this agitation
against the Government in power was not a simple political action but a means through
which the masses of Pakistan were providing a proof that they had accepted in every
way and from their hearts the election programme of the opposition, that is the Nizam-i-
Mustafa, and under no conditions would they allow the movement to be ignored" (pp.
264-265).

See Chapter 2 for the Nizam-i-Mustafa campaign.

"The change which came on 5 July 1977 in the shape of the imposition of Martial Law
might have been on the surface a political incident, but in reality it was the starting
point of an Islamic revolution" (p. 265).

To call an act of treason (as defined in the country's constitution) and usurpation the
starting point of an Islamic revolution is neither political nor virtuous.

There are several unofficial textbooks covering the same course. Seven of these am
examined below.

Mutala'a-i-Pakistan (Lazmi) by Professor Abdul Qayyum Natiq, Fazil Dars-i-Nizami
(Nasiria), Honours in Persian (Punjab), Advance in Urdu (Allahabad) [sic.], former
Honorary Professor, Allama Iqbal Open University, Professor in the Department of
Islamic Knowledge, Government College for Women, Karachi, etc., etc., Tahir Sons,
Karachi, first published March 1982, this edition October 1989. pp. 191.

"It is not only self-deception but an act of cheating and lying to say that at the time of
the demand for Pakistan the leaders had in mind the problem of the division of India
and they had no outline of the future constitution of the country" (p. 16); "it was in 1910
that due to the efforts of Muhammad Ali Jinnah the Muslim League and the Congress
held their sessions at the same time in Lucknow" and signed a pact (p. 170); as soon as
the partition of India was announced the Hindus started a killing of the Muslims which
has no parallel in history (pp. 131-133); "it was unfortunate for the country that
Chaudhri Muhammad Ali could not continue as Prime Minister and he was forced to
resign, and therefore the 1956 Constitution could not be operative" (p. 142); the 1962

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 83



Constitution had several clauses which were opposed to the "sacred shariat, for
example, polygamy, divorce, khula' and inheritance by the grandson" (p. 143); "whoever
came into power failed to implement Islam in the country because his own mind was
incapable of understanding the blessing of the law of God. The blessed day on which
the law of God was imposed on the country of God came on Saturday, 10 February
1979, and General Ziaul Huq was chosen by destiny to be the person who achieved the
distinction of implementing Islamic law" (p. 146); "in short, the real objective of the
creation of Pakistan and the demand of the masses was achieved when the Islamic
Ordinances were issued" by the Martial Law Government of General Zia (p. 158); "after
having been a part of our country for a long time, East Pakistan separated from us in
December 1971. This was a very great tragedy for Pakistan. In fact, it was the result of
an international conspiracy in which the U.S.S.R. openly and the U.S.A. indirectly
proved that they were the enemies of Pakistan. India used her armed and political force
for this purpose. Some Pakistani leaders also made serious mistakes, and the Big
Powers took full advantage of it, and the situation went out of control. Anyhow,
Bangladesh came into existence" (p. 179).

If the leaders were in possession of an outline of the future constitution of the country,
why did it take Pakistan nearly nine years to make a constitution? The Lucknow Pact
was signed in 1916. not in 1910. Communal riots had started several months before the
announcement of the partition which was made on 3 June; and in these riots Hindus
and Muslims killed each other: Hindus were not the only killers. The 1956 constitution
did operate, and Chaudhri Muhammad Ali's resignation had nothing to do with its
abrogation by Iskander Mirza. For Zia's Islamization and the secession of East Pakistan
see Chapter 2.

This book contains long references to Aligarh (pp. 47-59), Deoband (pp. 60-71), Nadwa
(pp. 72-78), Anjuman-i-Hamayat-i-Islam (pp.79-88), Sindh Madrasa (pp. 89-91), Islamia
College, Peshawar (pp. 94-95) and Sayyid Ahmad Khan (pp. 97-104). There are virtually
no references to any Muslim activity in Bengal or to Muslim political developments in
that province.

Mutala'a-i-Pakistan by Professor Muhammad Bashir Ahmed, M.A. (History, University
Gold Medalist, Arnold Gold Medalist). M.A. (Political Science), Diploma in
International Affairs. Diploma in Journalism, Diploma in Library Science; Department
of History, Government College, Baghbanpura, Lahore; published by Ilmi Kitabkhana,
Lahore, 1989 edition. pp. 288.

The Preface dated 14 August 1988, makes it very clear that the author's sympathies and
commitment lie with the Martial Law Government of General Ziaul Huq.

"The Muslims knew that if they won the freedom in the subcontinent their new
mamlakat would prove to be the centre of the hopes of the Muslims of the entire world

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 84



and also a fortress to protect Islam. This country would smite the Muslims of the East
and the West, and thus the Muslims would become so strong that they would be able to
liberate those Muslim areas which were still under the non-Muslims" (p. 12); in
December 1930 Iqbal presented the idea of "a separate and independent homeland for
the Muslims of the subcontinent", and then the author gives a quotation from the
Allahabad address which is not to be found in any text of the address (p. 18); "the
Lucknow Pact increased the political stature of the Muslim League because the
Congress clearly accepted it as the representative party of the Muslims. It also
impressed upon the Hindus the solidarity and strength of the Muslims"; but there is no
mention of the fact that the Punjab and Bengal suffered under the provisions of the Pact;
Montagu's name is misspell (pp. 88-89); the Treaty of Sevres is called in Urdu "Saiwray"
(p. 91); the Lahore Resolution was "passed on 23 March 1940" and it demanded "a
separate homeland" (p. 122); Jamaluddin Afghani "presented a scheme for creating an
independent Muslim State in the northern part of the subcontinent; he wanted to create
an independent Jamhuriyya made up of the present-day Pakistan, Afghanistan and the
Muslim-majority areas of Central Asia" (p. 155): in his pamphlet Now or Never Rahmat
Ali "demanded the immediate separation of the Muslim-majority areas of the
subcontinent" (p. 159); this scheme was rejected by "the delegates to the Round Table
Conference" (p. 160); "in 1930 Iqbal demanded a separate independent homeland for the
Muslims for the first time from a political platform" (p. 161); in 1938 "a committee
appointed by the Karachi Muslim Conference" said that the establishment of a separate
Muslim State was the "only solution of the rights" of the Muslims (p. 161); on 9 April
1946 a meeting of "five hundred Muslim members of the central and provincial
assemblies revised the Lahore Resolution" (p. 170); the communal killings of 1947 are
totally and exclusively attributed to the non-Muslims (p. 202); "the 1956 Constitution
had been in operation for only two years when the country was overwhelmed by
serious crises, disorder in every walk of life, economic decline, inflation and poverty.
Iskander Mirza was greatly responsible for the creation of these conditions. In order to
save his own Presidentship, on 7 October 1958, going beyond his authority, he
abrogated the Constitution and imposed Martial Law .... On 27 October Iskander
Mirza's resignation was accepted and he was allowed to leave for England. General
Muhammad Ayub Khan, the Chief Martial Law Administrator, took over the office of
the Head of State" (p. 221); "as a result of the general elections of 7 December 1970
discontent increased in the country, and under Shaikh Mujib-ur-Ralunan the movement
for the separation of East Pakistan under the name of Bangladesh was started. At last in
December 1971 East Pakistan separated from us" (p. 223): the agitation against the
Bhutto Government reached a stage where a nation-wide conflict appeared possible and
the patriotic Pakistanis were troubled by the fears of the future. In these conditions
General Ziaul Huq took over power. On 19 December 1984 President Zia, in accordance
with his promise to the masses of restoring democracy, held a referendum (p. 227);
"unfortunately, irs the past verbal promises for the implementation of the Islamic way
of life had been made, but no practical steps were taken because of selfishness and
political disorder .... One should be grateful that now serious efforts are being made in

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 85



this connection" (p. 232): "in 1971 East Pakistan parted from us and because Bangladesh
because of internal and external conspiracies and India's open aggression" (p. 238);
"Indian aggression and an international conspiracy separated the eastern part of
Pakistan from the country" (p. 283).

The Indian Muslim world had no idea that the creation of Pakistan would lead to
Islamic world unity and to the liberation of all Muslim areas under colonial ride; there
is nothing about this in the speeches and writings of the years of the Pakistan
movement. The plan attributed here to Jamaluddin "Afghani" has no basis in history. In
Now or Never Rahmat Ali demanded the separation of the Punjab, Sindh, NWFP and
Baluchistan (along with the state of Jammu and Kashmir), not of all the Muslim-
majority areas of India. His scheme was not rejected by the delegates to the Round
Table Conference but by the Muslim witnesses appearing before the Joint Select
Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform. The 1946 Delhi meeting was attended by
the Muslim League legislators, not by Muslim legislators; the two don't mean the same
thing. On other points see Chapter 2.

Like all other textbooks, this one also dismisses the contribution of Bengal to the
nationalist movement in just one page on the Faraizi Tahrik (pp. 55-56); but there are
eleven pages given to the Aligarh movement (pp. 57-68) and there are several more
references to Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan and his followers.

Mutala'a-i-Pakistan (Lazmi) barai Degree Classes, written by Dr. Muhammad Din,
Department of Islamic Studies, University of Peshawar, under the supervision of Dr.
Qazi Mujibur Rahman al-Azhari, Dean, Faculty of Islamic Studies and Arabic,
University of Peshawar, published by Taj Kutab Khana, Peshawar, December 1984, pp.
218.

In 1930 Iqbal "presented a scheme for the creation of an independent Islamic riasat in
India or outside it" (p. 19).

For Iqbal's Allahabad address see Chapter 2.

He can't decide whether to call the Aligarh College an "institution" or a "movement",
but he is sure that many of its graduates led the nationalist movement and, after 1947,
rendered great services to Pakistan (p. 47).

"The services of the Dar-ul-Ulum of Deoband in the cause of the Pakistan movement are
unforgettable" (p. 51).

The role of Deoband in preaching an illiberal version of Islam and in opposing the
creation of Pakistan is discussed in Chapter 2.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 86



"The Muslim rulers of India did not make a colony of it like the British" (p. 70).

Refinements of usage span (a discussion of which will be beyond the comprehension of
the students and the textbook writers), in common parlance colonialism and
imperialism are synonymous terms, though they should not be. Muslim rulers were
foreigners, they invaded and conquered India by force or arms, and ruled over the local
population. The native subjects sometimes fought the alien masters, but more often
collaborated with them in their own interest, learnt their language (Persian), and served
in their administration. Now read "the British" for "Muslims" and "English" for "Persian
in my last two sentences, and the parallel between Muslim rule and British rule runs
smooth. Add to it the fact that the religions of the two imperial rulers were different
from the faith of the conquered Indians. Further, both tried to proselytize: the first
through Sufis, the lure of material advancement, the attraction of equal social status (in
theory), the temptation of being counted among the ruling class, the psychological fear
of the foreign invader, and at times coercion; the second through missionaries, and all
other inducements mentioned above. The Muslim rulers won more converts because
their tenure of power was longer than that of the British. In both cases it was the lowest
stratum of Hindu society which embraced the state religion. The Hindus presented
these attacks on their fold. Afghan and Mughal periods were full of Hindu-Muslim
battles and Hindu revolts. In the nineteenth century there were some Hindu-Christian
riots in South and West India, but they did not spread because the number of Christians
was too small to act as an irritant, the British rulers announced a policy of religious
neutrality, and the Christian Indians shared the religion of the rulers. But Hindu-
Muslim riots continued and multiplied because there were many more Muslin's and,
without official protection. they were easy victims.

The Hindus hated the two imperial powers in equal degree. For them both were
malachchas (religiously or ritually unclean). cruel outsiders, pitiless invaders, despoilers
of their country, oppressive rulers, and therefore unwelcome intruders. They wanted to
get rid of both, and this attitude was perfectly natural.

In all these respects Muslim and British rules fall in the same class. But there was one
vital difference. The Muslims made India their hoarse while the British did not. Five
factors dictated this decision: climate, geography, history, size, and numbers. The
British bound India too hot to live in permanently. Were India a salubrious place they
might have considered making another Canada of it. Geography favored the Muslims.
They had come from contiguous or nearby lands whose climate was, by and large, not
very different from that of most parts of India. They did not find it a trial to live here.
History, too, was on their side. Waves of foreign invaders had been washing the Indian
land for several centuries and leaving behind deposits of varying sizes, like the Greeks
and the Huns. Some of them had not receded, like the Aryans. If the people from
Central Asia decided to stay on, they were only adding one more ingredient to a pre-
existing brew. The huge size of India was beyond the colonizing capacity of Britain. No

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 87



matter how many people from England, Scotland and Ireland chose to migrate to India
they would always be a tiny group among the millions who populated her vast spaces.
The same was true in the numerical sense. While the British would be an
unmentionable handful in the subcontinent, the Muslims made up a respectable
minority which could not rule the country and yet make its presence felt in decision
making.

But it is not true to say that the Muslim rulers did not make a colony of India. They
were settlers in a new country, forming a separate community among themselves, and
looking back nostalgically to their erstwhile motherlands (re. Tuzk-i-Baburi, Humayun's
memoirs, Gulbadan Begam's reminiscences, Tuzk-i-Jahangiri). That is exactly what a
colony means. Further, the alien ruling class did not merge with the local converts,
rarely recruited them to higher posts, refused to marry into them. and generally looked
down upon them. It is not a matter of chance or accident that up to and including
Aurungzeb's reign the great majority of the mansabdars was of foreign origin. At the end
of 500 years of continuous Muslim rule only a minimal number of local Muslims had
managed to climb high on the ladder of preferment.

Here I may add an interesting footnote to the sociological history of modem Muslim
India and Pakistan. Almost every Muslim of any importance claimed (and still claims
today) in his autobiography. reminiscences. memoirs, journal and bio-data that his
ancestors had come from Yemen, Hijaz, Central Asia, Iran, Ghazni or some other
foreign territory. In most cases this is a false claim, for its arithmetic reduces the hordes
of local converts to an insignificant number. Actually it is an aftermath and a
confirmation of Afghan and Mughal exclusiveness. It is also a declaration of
disaffiliation from the soil on which these shimmers have lived for centuries and to
which, in all probability, they have belonged since history began. If all the Wastis,
Qureshis, Siddiquies, Hashmis, Khans, Sayyids, Bukharis, Ghaznawis, Fatimis, Zaidis,
Mashhadis, Faruqis, etc., etc.. have foreign origins and their forefathers accompanied
the invading armies or followed them, what happens to the solemn averment that Islam
spread widely in India? Are we expected to believe that the local converts, whose
number must have been formidable, were all nincompoops and the wretched of the
earth — incapable over long centuries of producing any leaders, thinkers or scholars?

"The British captured power in India through trade and deceit". The paragraph heading
reads: "British usurpation of the subcontinent". The -Muslim conquerors are not called
usurpers (p. 72).

"The Muslim League Working Committee, in its meeting in Delhi held on 4 February
1940, decided that the Muslims should make a clear demand for the creation of a
separate mamlakat" (p. 90). In 1947, "the Hindus in order to wreak their vengeance for
the partition of the country and to punish the Muslims for having demanded Pakistan,
indulged in large-scale looting, rapine, arson. murder and destruction" (p. 105).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 88



If any such decision was taken on this date it is not recorded in the resolutions
published officially by the Muslim League office. The point about the communal riots
has been covered in earlier pages.

"Soon after the creation of Pakistan, authority passed into the hands of the people who
were not sincere in enforcing Islam, and they tried to turn the country's ideological
direction [pahlu] towards secularism [la-diniat] [my translation appears to have no
meaning, but it is an exact rendering of the original Urdu] .... In this heinous [mazmum]
action these people were guided by some foreign powers" (p. 136).

For the gravity and the stupidity of this accusation see below Chapter 2.

"History cannot show the parallel of the national Nizam-i-Mustafa movement launched
in March 1977 against the former government. It fully reflected the wishes and desires
of the masses that now they were not prepared to spare any effort in [the achievement
of] an Islamic way of life. The present government is well aware of these sentiments of
the people .... Today considerable progress has been made towards the enforcement of
the Islamic system" (p. 137).

I have discussed the nature and scope of this Islamization in Chapter 2.

"After the elections of 1970, when the crisis of [caused by the issue of] the transfer of
power in Pakistan turned grave. India not only instigated the East Pakistani leaders to
revolt but, acting the aggressor, sent her army into East Pakistan. This storm of the
enmity [mukalafat] and misunderstanding of our own people and of foreigners at last
cut Pakistan into two pieces" (pp. 204). The secession of East Pakistan is dealt with in
Chapter 2.

Tamir-i-Mutala'a-i-Pakistan Lazmi: BA., B.Sc., Medical, Engineering, Commerce aur
Maqabalay ke tamam Imtahanon ke lie mustanad Kitab, written by Professor Saeed Osman
Malick, Head, Department of Political Science, and Muhammad Ikram Rabbani,
Department of Political Science, both of the Government College, Lahore, published by
Polimar Publications, Lahore, 1987, preface dated January 1985, pp. 224.

Some examples of its contents:

"Iqbal took his degree in law from England" (p. 20).

Iqbal was called to the bar. He did not take any degree in law from England or
elsewhere.

"The Aligarh movement made the Muslims economically affluent" (p. 44).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 89



The Aligarh movement established the MAO College, and the graduates of this College
entered government employment and independent professions. But the opportunities
granted to a few hundred persons to earn a respectable living does not make the entire
community of millions affluent.

"The greatest significance of the Lucknow Pact lies in the fact that at least the Hindus,
for the first time, acknowledged the Muslims as a separate nation .... The British policy
of divide and rule lost its effectiveness .... With this Pact was founded Hindi-Muslim
unity in India" (pp. 74-75).

The Lucknow Pact is discussed in detail in Chapter 2.

In the Allahabad Address "Iqbal presented the demand for [the creation of a separate
mamlakat" (p. 106).

He did not. See Chapter 2.

Chaudhri Rahmat Ali left for England for higher studies "in 1927", where he took his
M.A. degree from the University of Cambridge and "his Bar-at-Law from the Dublin
University"; in January 1933 he and his three friends published "an article" entitled Now
and Never (p. 107).

Rahmat Ali left Lahore for England on 30 or 31 October 1930, not in 1927. He was not
called to the bar at the University of Dublin. Prospective barristers do not study at a
university, but an inn of court. Now or Never was not an article which appeared in any
journal or newspaper, but a leaflet issued independently.

"The 1956 Constitution was cancelled on 8 October 1958 and Martial Law was imposed
on the country" (p. 169; no mention of a coup).

The Ayub constitution "was in operation from 1962 till 25 March 1969, while General
Yahya Khan promulgated another constitution in the country" (p. 170).

General Yahya Khan did not promulgate a new constitution on or after 25 March 1969.

He ruled the country through martial law till his departure from office in December
1971.

"Between 1969 and 1971 the country lived under Martial Law. In this period a separatist
movement emerged in East Pakistan at the instigation of India, and using it as a pretext
Bharat invaded Pakistan in December 1971, which resulted in the breakup of Pakistan,
and in the separation of East Pakistan which now emerged as Bangladesh" (p. 170).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 90



For the creation of Bangladesh see Chapter 2.

"In 1977 the Nizam-i-Mustafa movement shook the Bhutto government, and on 6 July
1977 Martial Law was once again imposed under the leadership of General Muhammad
Ziaul Huq" (p. 172).

The Nizam-i-Mustafa movement is discussed blow in Chapter 2.

"It was a great misfortune that after the Partition there was no one in Pakistan, except
Hazrat Quaid-i-Azam and some of his old companions, who wanted to enforce an
Islamic system in the country. The overwhelming majority [bharmar] of the Constituent
Assembly wanted to make Pakistan a ladini [irreligious] state" (p. 173).

This libel against Jinnah and his colleagues is dealt with in Chapter 2.

"The situation in East Pakistan deteriorated with the arrest of Shaikh Mujibur Rahman,
and, exploiting the situation in East Pakistan, India attacked Pakistan. Indian aggression
resulted in the separation of East Pakistan from the country" (p. 173).

See Chapter 2 below.

"In 1977 the present military government took over the administration of the country
under General Muhammad Ziaul Huq. Normally, a military government is not bound
by any law or constitution, but the present Government created a new precedent by
maintaining the 1973 Constitution, and this had good results for the country. The
present Government has, for the first time, sincerely taken practical steps for enforcing
an Islamic System in the country, and has laid the foundation of a very great revolution.
The present Government issued various Martial Law regulations to promulgate the
Islamic system. General Ziaul Huq's Government has, in all sincerity, taken effective
steps to [the Urdu word used here is jari, to issue, which makes no sense, and I have not
tried to translate it] Islam. He deserves congratulations" (p. 174).

General Ziaul Huq did not maintain the 1973 constitution. It was "put in abeyance", and
later changed out of recognition to suit his whims and ambitions. For the compliments
to Zia see Chapter 2.

"Unfortunately, after the establishment of Pakistan, during the first few years of
independence the country was full of elements and forces which did not want to see
Pakistan as an Islamic society. The greatest misfortune was that these elements
succeeded in entering the first Constituent Assembly of the country, where they tried
their best to achieve their despicable objectives .... Today, 36 years after becoming free,
we are still far from our goal ... The present military Government came into power in

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 91



1977. Reading alight the real aim of the country, it is treading the correct path and has
made valuable efforts to establish a complete Islamic system. For taking these steps the
government of General Ziaul Huq deserves congratulations: it has taken solid steps to
bring the Islamic system to the country, and, unlike the previous governments, it has
not just used the name of Islam as an empty formality" (pp. 179-180).

Both parts of the passage are commented upon in Chapter 2.

Mutala'a-i-Pakistan Lazmi barai Talaba BA., B.Sc., M.B.B.S., Agriculture University wa digur
muqabalay ke imtahanat ke lie, written by Zahid Husain, M.A. (Political Science), M.A.
(History). Government Degree College, Qasur, revised by Professor Anwaarul Huq
Qureshi, Government College. Gujranwala. and Professor Muhammad Saleem Sahib,
Government Degree College. Mandi Bahauddin, published by Amin Book Dept,
Lahore, November 1989. pp. 164.

Some of the statements and "facts" presented in it:

The Hindus wanted the Urdu language to disappear from the subcontinent. But "the
elimination of Urdu was tantamount to the elimination of the entire [Muslim] nation,
and the Indian Muslims realized this very well. Therefore, one of their primary
objectives was the protection of Urdu; in this way, the creation of Pakistan emerged as
their demand" (p. 14).

See Chapter 2 below for the tendentious character of the statement.

"Till Iqbal's Allahabad address the Indian Muslims believed that if the Congress
accepted their separate entity and agreed to protect their economic. cultural and
political rights the two nations could live together in a united India" (p. 21).

The Indian Muslims did not believe in this. Dozens of people proposed some kind of a
division of India before Iqbal's misreported suggestion.

"Though several schemes of a division of India had been presented prior to the
Allahabad address, yet Allama Iqbal offered the idea of a new State" (p. 21).

This statement contradicts the one made immediately before it.

"It will not be wrong to say that the Allahabad address was a milestone of the Pakistan
movement; because all the earlier concepts of a division of India were individual [made
in an individual capacity] and incomplete. But Atlanta Iqbal, speaking for the first time
from the political platform of the Muslim League, rejected the idea of a shared
nationality with proper arguments, and then, with reasoning, made it clear that the
Hindus and Muslims were different in respect of religion, politics, civilization and

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 92



culture .... [He proceeded to suggest that] the Punjab. Sindh, NWFP and Baluchistan
could be separated from India and made into a separate homeland [watan]" (p. 23).

At Allahabad Iqbal did not argue for a two-nation theory; on the contrary he spoke if
"unity in diversity". He also did not demand a separate homeland. The point has been
covered at many places in earlier pages. Full details in Chapter 2 below.

"The Lucknow Pact is of great historical importance. Under its terms, the Congress for
the first time acknowledged the Muslims as a proper [ba qaida] separate nation, which
was a great triumph for the Muslim League .... The Pact demonstrated not only to the
British but also to the whole world that the Muslin's were a separate nation" (p. 54).

Far from being a triumph for the Muslim League the Lucknow Pact was a proof of the
party's shortsightedness, total lack of consideration for the future and interests of the
Muslims of Bengal and the Punjab (the majority of the community in the subcontinent),
and complete subservience to a handful of leaders of the United Provinces. Full details
are given in Chapter 2 below.

In 1930 Iqbal demanded "a separate homeland [watan]" (p. 85).

He did no such thing. I have dealt with the point in earlier pages but will furnish full
details in Chapter 2.

"Chaudhri Rahmat Ali went to England to do his bar .... He published his Now or Never
on 18 January 1933 .... He died in Europe in 12 February 1951. He is buried in in
Woking" (p. 87).

Rahmat Ali was called to the bar, but his primary purpose in going to England was to
study at a university, which he achieved by taking a degree at Cambridge. To say that
he died in Europe is like saying that Jinnah died in Asia. He died on 3 February, not 12.
He is buried in the Market Road Cemetery, Cambridge, not in Woking.

The use of the "states" in the plural in the text of the Lahore Resolution was corrected "at
a Muslim League session held on 9 April 1946" (p. 101).

The All India Muslim League did not hold any session at Delhi in April 1946 or
throughout that year. He is confusing the Convention summoned by Jinnah of all the
Muslim League legislators with an annual session; a very serious mistake, considering
that this gathering amended the Lahore Resolution which it had no right to do. Full
details in Chapter 2.

On the Ayub coup: "Because of the wrong policies and responsibilities of the self-styled
political leaders the country stood at the brink of a disaster, and the need of a strong

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 93



government was greatly felt. In these circumstances, General Muhammad Ayub Khan
marhum imposed Martial Law in October 1958 and assumed power and abrogated the
1956 Constitution" (p. 120).

For the correction see below Chapter 2.

In the 1977 anti-government Nizam-i-Mustafa agitation "the masses supported the
opposition parties in a great way [zabardast tariqe se]. The people of the country were
clearly split into two sections .... Things were getting out of hand. The other major
power of the country, the armed forces, decided to take over the administration of the
country" (p. 125).

If the masses supported the Nizam-e-Mustafa movement "in a great way", why were the
people "split into two sections"? Are the masses and the people two different entities?
For the antics of the movement see Chapter 2.

Rahbar-i-Mutala'a-i-Pakistan (Lazmi) barai Tulaba era Talibat Degree Classes Engineering wa
Medical no Commerce aur Zar'i University, in accordance with the syllabus of all Pakistani
Universities, written by Professor Ghulam Sarwar Cheemah, Department of History,
Government College, Lahore, Professor Rafique Chaudhri, Department of History,
Government College, Faisalabad, and Professor Naseer Ahmad Chaudhri, Department
of Political Science, Government Murray College, Sialkot. published by Qureshi
Brothers Publishers, Lahore, 1985. pp. 280.

The Preface opens with this sentence: "Pakistan is the embodiment of the wishes of Sir
Sayyid Ahmnad Khan, the fulfillment of the dreams of tribal, the fruit of the leadership
of Quaid-i-Azam, and the martyr-place of the hundreds of thousands of Muslims" (p. 1).

Sir Sayyid Abroad Khan did not wish that India should be divided and a Muslim state
created. "Hundreds of thousands of Muslims" did not die in Pakistan in 1947: they died
in India. "Martyr-place" is a meaningless word, even in its Urdu original.

Other examples of historical knowledge:

"The fact is that it was the Aligarh movement which gave a new life to the Muslims of
the subcontinent .... It prepared the Muslims for the task of freeing themselves from the
yoke of both the British and the Hindus" (p. 81).

"The Muslims of the entire subcontinent always looked to Aligarh [for guidance] ...
Whenever there was any problem the Muslims looked to Aligarh for leadership" (p. 83).

Most of the leadership that guided the nationalist and Pakistan movements was the gift
of the Aligarh movement" (p. 84).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 94



The wild praise of Aligarh has little basis in fact. This exaggerated emphasis on Aligarh
also ignores the contribution made by the Muslims of the rest of India.

"The sons of the Deoband not only imparted religious training to one whole generation
..." (p. 87).

Deoband trained not "one whole" generation but, unfortunately, three generations. For
what Deoband stood for and did see Chapter 2.

The 2½ page account of the Jamia Millia of Delhi is silent on its pro-Congress policies
(pp. 104-106).

Mawlana Muhammad Ali "took his honors degree in English Literature from Oxford"
(p. 106).

He took his degree in Modern History, not in English Literature.

The Indian National Congress is called "All India National Congress" (p. 109).

"Under the Lucknow Pact the All India National Congress for the first time
acknowledged the Muslim League as the sole Muslim organization. Secondly,
constitutionally and democratically, it accepted Muslims as a proper [bagaida] separate
nation .... The Government's divide and rule policy received a great blow" (p. 125).

All the statements about the Pact are incorrect. See Chapter 2.

In 1930 Iqbal presented "the concept of the necessity of an independent Muslim State"
(p. 157).

In 1930 Iqbal offered "a scheme for the division of India" (p. 172).

He did not suggest a division of India in 1930. See Chapter 2 for full details.

The 1939 confederacy scheme of "A Punjabi" is said to be the work of Nawab Sir
Muhammad Shahnawaz Khan of Mamdot (p. 174).

It was the work of Mian Kafayet Ali, who wrote under the pseudonym of "A Punjabi",
not that of Nawab Sir Shahnawaz Kilian of Mamdot.

"The population of the eastern wing of Pakistan was larger than that of the western
wing. Therefore, the idea was put [by whom?] in the mind of the Bengalis that the
language of the majority area should have the status of the national language. Keeping

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 95



in view the delicate situation then obtaining in Pakistan, such problems should not have
been brought to the public view [manzar-i-am par]. But it provided a golden opportunity
to the Hindus, who wanted to see another problem added to the already existing ones.
Even if we consider the demand of the Bengalis as reasonable, this was not the
opportune time to put it forward; moreover, sometimes national requirements demand
self-sacrifice" (p. 223).

On 1971: "Shaikh Mujibur Rahman wanted to enforce a constitution of his own liking
and insisted on convening the Assembly. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto wanted the Assembly to
meet after some agreement had been reached. In these circumstances, an open revolt
erupted in East Pakistan, [the policies of the] foreign powers and the Indian military
intervention turned the scales in favor of Mujibur Rahman and his clique, and the
Pakistan Army was forced to surrender. East Pakistan became Bangladesh" (pp. 233-
234).

See Chapter 2 on the secession of East Pakistan.

On 1977: "The Government negotiated with the Pakistan National Alliance. It was
declared that the talks had ended in an agreement. Al the last movement, Air Marshal
Asghar Khan refused to accept the agreement. The anti-Government movement grew
more intensive. At last, on 4 July 1977, the brave and patriotic army of Pakistan once
again stepped forward to save the country and the nation, took over the government,
and announced the imposition of Martial Law. The Assembly and the Senate were
dissolved. Parts of the 1973 Constitution were suspended. With a view to maintaining
its neutral position the military government promised to hold fresh elections within 3
months and transfer power to the representatives of the people. But soon the new
government realized that conditions were worse than they should have been [zarurat se
ziada kharab], and therefore its first duty was to attend to putting things right" (p. 235).

For the Zia coup see Chapter 2.

A Textbook of Pakistan Studies for B.Sc., B.Com., M.B.B.S., M.A. and B.E., by Sayeeduddin,
Lecturer in Pakistan Studies, Mehran University of Engineering and Technology,
published by Farooq Kitab Ghar, Karachi, 1st ed. 1986, pp. 204.

Dr. S. Riawan Ali Riavi, Professor of Political Science. University of Karachi, gives his
opinion, which is included in the book, that "it is really a bold step to meet the growing
demand of the literature on the subject .... This book will serve a lot to all concerned
with the subject" (p. xi).

Rahmat Ali "was a post-graduate student" at Cambridge (p. 3); "the first and the
foremost aim of the emergence of Pakistan was the establishment of an Islamic State.
The founders of Pakistan had made a pledge to the Muslims of the sub-continent to

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 96



make Pakistan an Islamic State" (pp. 5-6); "ideology of Pakistan meant [sic.] to achieve a
separate homeland where the Muslims could rule according to their own code of life
and according to their own cultural growth, traditions and Islamic Laws" (p. 10); Iqbal
was "the first important public figure in the United India to profound [sic.] the idea of a
separate homeland for the Muslims of the sub-continent .... As Iqbal is the ideal dreamer
of the very conception of Pakistan, therefore, his thoughts could be the Ideology of
Pakistan" (p.11); in 1930 Iqbal "formulated conception of an Islamic State in India and
outlined its physical boundaries" (p. 13); the Lahore Resolution was passed on 23 March
1940 (p. 89).

Rahmat Ali was an undergraduate at Emmaneul College, Cambridge. He did not read
or work for a post-graduate degree.

The founders of Pakistan did not promise the people an Islamic State, certainly not of
the kind the book means. The definition of the ideology of Pakistan conveys no sense or
meaning. How can a people rule "according to their own cultural growth"? School-boy
English. Iqbal did not demand a separate state. What is an "ideal dreamer"? Now we are
given a new definition of the ideology of Pakistan: the thoughts of Iqbal. For other
errors in this passage see Chapter 2 below.

He discusses Muslim educational and cultural institutions of India: Aligarh (pp: 33-51),
Deoband (pp. 52-55), and Nadwa, Anjuman-i-Hamayat-i-lslam, Sindh Madrasa and
Islamia College, Peshawar (pp. 56-57). There is no mention of Bengal's contribution to
Muslim Indian politics, education or culture. The break-up of 1971 finds no place in the
book, nor is there any discussion at all of democracy or military rule or the various
coups.

All the above books aimed at providing a text for the compulsory paper. In the early
1980s the Atlanta Iqbal Open University decided to offer Pakistan Studies as a full-
length optional course for its degree classes. An elaborate syllabus was drawn up by a
"Course Team", which drew up the curriculum, wrote the contents of the textbook,
translated parts of it (Ron-which language is not known), edited the body of the book,
and coordinated the entire exercise.

The personnel responsible for this academic exercise ought to be mentioned. The
coordinator was Abdul Hameed Rathor (antecedents or qualifications not mentioned).
The authors were: Khwaja Saeeduddin Ahmad Dar (Head of the Department of
International Relations, and Dean Administration, Islamia University. Quaid-i-Azam
University (?) (presumably he wrote in English because his name is followed by the
translator, Professor Karam Hydari), Dr. Abdul Harmed (a former Professor of History
at the University of the Punjab), and Dr. Muhammad Aslam Sayyid (Assistant Professor
of History, Quaid-i-Azam University). Editors: laved Iqbal Sayyid and Anwarul Huq
(no details about them given). Parts of the book were revised [nazar sani] by: Dr.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 97



Muhammad Yusuf Abbasi and Dr. Riaz Abroad (Department of History, Quaid-i-Azam
University).

The Course Committee consisted of: Dr. A.H. Dani (Professor Emeritus, Quaid-i-Azam
University), Dr. Sarfraz K. Qureshi (Director of Research. Pakistan Institute of
Development Economics), Dr. Muhammad Aslam Sayyid (Assistant Professor of
History, Quaid-i-Azam University), Professor laved Iqbal Sayyid, Dr. Khwaja
Muinuddin Jamil. Abdul Hameed Rathor, Muhammad Rashid and Faruq Solangi.

The first volume of the book, dealing with History, was published as Mutala'a-i-
Pakistan, B.A. (Tarikh ) by the Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad in 1984 in 4,000
copies. It is a work of 404 pages of larger than usual size. Some of its assertions are
quoted below:

The 1857 revolt is called "The War of Independence" (p. 67).

On the "War of Independence" see Chapter 2.

I. H. Qureshi's The Muslim Community of the Indo-Pakistan Sub-continent is cited as
The Muslim Community of India and Pakistan (p. 107 fn.2).

"Mawlawi Abdul Huq's statement that the Urdu language was the first brick of the
foundation of Pakistan is perfectly correct" (p. 159).

This would make Muslim nationalism a purely linguistic nationalism and Pakistani
patriotism an ethnic chauvinism. Pakistan was neither demanded nor achieved by the
Muslims of Delhi and the United Provinces alone. None of the top leaders of the
Pakistan movement are on record as having equated the preservation of Urdu with the
creation of Pakistan. The All India Muslim League did not pass any resolution to the
effect that Urdu shall be the official or national language of Pakistan, and in this it was
wiser than the rulers of Pakistan: for had such a declaration been made many Bengalis.
Sindhis, Baluchis and Pathan, and at least some Punjabis, not to speak of the
prospective migrants from Western and Southern India, would have abandoned, or at
least weakened in their enthusiasm for, the ideal of Pakistan. Remember that when this
"first brick of the foundation" was hurled at the Bengali Pakistanis the act sowed the
first seeds of alienation and secession. That should be enough of a wanting to a people
who are capable of teaming from history.

In 1930 Iqbal suggested the creation of "an Islamic mamlakat in the north-west of the
subcontinent" (p. 234).

Iqbal did not do so. See Chapter 2 below.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 98



Sir Theodore Morison is repeatedly called "Marlin", and his book, which is quoted but
whose title is not mentioned even once, is said to have been published in 1818 (p. 248).

For this unbelievable mistake see Chapter 2. All the leading historians of the country
working collectively did not know the name of a former principal of the MAO College,
Aligarh, did not consider it appropriate to mention the title of the book they were
quoting, and were ignorant even about the century in which it was published. For
details see Chapter 2.

Rahmat Ali, in his "booklet" called Now or Never, "presented a plan for dividing India:
(p. 252).

Rahmat Ali's Now or Never was a 4-page leaflet, not a booklet.

On the Ayub coup: "on 7 October 1958 everybody heard that a Presidential Order has
been issued suspending the constitution" (p. 366).

On the Ayub coup again: "In the night of 27 October 1958 Iskander Mirza was relieved of
all his authority, and then under the leadership of General Muhammad Ayub Khan, the
Army gained complete control of the administration of the country, and so began in the
country a new era of political stability, strong administration and peace and quiet" (p.
372).

If martial law, suspension of citizens' rights, political oppression, abolition of direct
elections, military rule, and concentration of all powers in one person amount to
stability, peace and quiet, then it must have been the stability, peace and quiet of the
graveyard. The dead neither move nor howl.

In the 1965 war with India Pakistan "defended her frontiers with success" (p. 390).

On the 1965 war see Chapter 2.

In 1969 different political groups were making different demands. "This silsila of
demands assumed the proportions of disorder. As s result the President [Ayub Khan]
asked the Commander-in-Chief, General Muhammad Yahya Khan, to look after the
administrative conditions [Sadar ne . . . Yahya Khan ko intizami halat chalanay ke bare men
kaha]" (p. 395). The reader will notice how stupid the statement is both in Urdu and in
its literal translation.

President Ayub Khan did not ask General Yahya Khan to "look after the administration"
of the country. He made the Commander-in-Chief, a sodden soldier and an infamous
womanizer, who was glad to saunter over the destinies of the nation with one hand on
the gun and the other around the whisky glass, the master of the land. Yahya Khan did

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 99



not succeed Ayub; he threw the Field Marshal out. Under the constitution then in force
the only person who could succeed Ayub was the Speaker of the National Assembly.
But Ayub was either afraid lest a civilian legitimate government might by him for his
misdeeds, or anxious to please the army which had been technically out of power since
1962 and was feeling restless at this deprivation, or bent upon revenging himself on the
people of Pakistan who had agitated against him. The country had called him a "dog";
he retaliated by handing it over to a dog-handler who lost no time in breaking up the
country. Ayub's pique cost the nation a terrible price. None of these things are
mentioned in the textbooks. See also Chapter 2 below.

On the 1971 events: "Enemy forces were busy in Pakistan. The Hindu elements did not
want any proper agreement to be arrived at between the two wings of the country ....
[On 23 March] the army intervened. It was asked to restore law and order. Mujibur
Rahman was arrested. Many seats won by the Awami League were declared vacant.
The army succeeded in restoring peace and order. But these steps created intense hatred
between the two wings. India was studying the developments carefully ... and by the
end of November she had completed her preparations for a war against Pakistan.
Pakistani leadership lacked both diplomatic skill and an organized propaganda
machinery which could explain her position on the international level. The result was
that when hostilities commenced between the two countries India profited from having
neutralized the so-called pro-Pakistan lobbies in the different countries. In the first
week of December India invaded Pakistan from both directions. The Pakistan Army
possessed fighting quality, but it lacked qualified, experienced and quick-to-react
leadership. The Indian naval blockade separated the Bay of Bengal from the western
wing. Thus the [Pakistan] forces were hemmed-in in this area [which area?]. They were
felt to fend for themselves. Of course, our armed forces fought valiantly. They had to
surrender to the Indian forces which had captured Dacca on 16 December" (pp. 400-
402).

On the break-up of Pakistan see Chapter 2.

The bibliographies of the end of each part of the book are defective on three counts:
they are inadequate, no information beyond the author's name and the book's tide is
given, and at places the English publications are listed in Urdu transliteration which
makes it difficult to identify them.

The second volume of this work was prepared by a team which contained some new
names. The coordinator was still Abdul Hameed Rathor. The authors: Saeeduddin
Ahmad Dar (Head of Department of International Relations, Quaid-i-Azam University),
Dr. Muhammad Zafar Ahmad Khan (Principal, Government College, Asghar Mall,
Rawalpindi), Dr. Makhdum Tasaddaq Husain (a former Professor of the University of
the Punjab), Parvez Iqbal Chemah (Associate Professor, Department of International
Relations, Quaid-i-Azam University), Tauseef Ahmad (Research Associate, Institute of

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 100



Manpower, Islamabad), Sajjad Haider Mallick (Assistant Professor, Gordon College,
Rawalpindi), Khalid Hayat Chaudhri (Research Associate, Institute of Manpower,
Islamabad), Nazir Siddiqui, and Iqbal Ahmad Bakht (Assistant Professor?). Translators:
Professor Karam Hydari. Hussain Hamdani, and Anwaarul Huq. Editors: Professor
laved Iqbal Sayyid, Bashir Mahmud Akhtar, and Anwaarul Huq. Portions of the book
were revised by Dr. Muhammad Riaz (Department of Iqbaliat?) and Saeed Shafqat
(Head of the Department of Pakistan Studies, Quaid-i-Azam University).

Their handiwork was published in 1983 (why was the second volume published before
the first one?) by the Mama Iqbal Open University under the title of Mutala'a-i-Pakistan,
B.A. Kitab Doim, in the same format as that of the first volume, with 393 pages, and a
print order of 3,000 copies. It dealt with the economics, civilization (tamaddun) and
international relations of Pakistan.

Among other things it contains the following opinions, comments and statements:

"In the post-1947 Pakistan very thoughtful religious literature has appeared.
Ideologically, there is a great deal available on Pakistani nationalism and Pakistan's
relations with the Islamic World" (p. 175).

It is impossible to admit this claim. Very little has been written on Islam which is
scholarly, non-sectarian, thoughtful and readable. The only books commanding
academic respect are those by Aziz Ahmad and Fazlur Rahman; these were written and
published abroad: except for a few years when he was Director of the Islamic Research
Institute and was then hounded out of the country, Fazlur Rahman taught in Britain,
Canada and the United States; Aziz Ahmad worked in England and Canada. On
Pakistani nationalism there is absolutely nothing. As for Pakistan's relations with the
Islamic world, there is not a single volume on relations with Egypt or Turkey or Saudi
Arabia or Iran or any other country, although we have a well-established Institute of
International Affairs in Karachi and at least two study centres at the universities
specializing in North Africa. the Middle East and Central Asia. Professors should not
make wild statements which can be proved to be lies by anyone who visits a library.

On the 1971 break-up: "Yahya Khan tried to bring about a consensus among all leaders
and parties. But Mujibur Rahman's opposition [mukhalafat] did not allow this. He began
to demand the secession of East Pakistan, and this led to a series of riots and
processions in East Pakistan. The Army intervened on 21 March 1971. Many Hindu
refugees left for India. A civil war began in the country. India provided training to the
volunteers and refugees. This continued till 4 December 1971. Then India began a full-
scale invasion of East Pakistan, which led to a war between the two countries. As a
result of this, in December 1971, East Pakistan separated from the country" (pp. 350-
351).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 101



For the 1971 break-up see Chapter 2.

The bibliographies of this book are worse than those of the first volume.

All the books examined above relate to the compulsory course on Pakistan Studies.
There is no space for an equally derailed scrutiny of the books used by the B.A. students
of history as an optional and major subject. Purely as an example I now look at only one
textbook of history which has been in use during the last thirty years or more, and is
written by a Professor of History in East Pakistan. The edition in current use is dated
1989, without any information on the years of the earlier editions or reprints.

A New History of Indo-Pakistan Since 1526 by K. Ali, published by Naeem Publishers,
Lahore, 1989, pp. 186-393.

We are concerned here with the second part of the book which covers the history of
India and Pakistan from the advent of the British till 1970. All page references are to this
second part.

In Chapter VIII, entitled "The War of Independence", in the text the event is throughout
referred to as "the revolt of 1857" (pp. 126-137).

The Secretary of State for India, E.S. Montagu, is repeatedly called "Lord Montague"
(pp. 192-193).

No one called Lord Montague existed who was also Secretary of State for India. The
man referred to was Mr. Montagu (without the e).

"It was Sir Muhammad Iqbal who first dreamt of a separate homeland for the Muslims
of India .... He felt the need of a separate land for the Indian Muslims"; the passage
quoted from the Allahabad address is inaccurate (p. 252).

Iqbal was not the first to have this dream; in fact, he did not have this dream at all till
1937, by which time a hundred other persons had seen the vision.

"In 1933, Chowdhury Rahmat Ali, a young thoughtful politician, was the first man who
prepared the word 'Pakistan"' (p. 252).

Rahmat Ali was not a politician. The professor should know, while writing in English,
that the word Pakistan is not a curry or an omelet which you "prepare"; you coin or
invent or devise or think up or contrive or put together or make up or create or suggest
or conceive or hit upon or discover or imagine a word, you never prepare it.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 102



"On 23 March 1940 the Muslim League laid claim to a separate homeland. i.e., Pakistan
for the Muslims" (p. 254).

Three errors in eighteen words: read 24 March for 23; read "independent states" for a
"separate homeland"; read nothing for "Pakistan" (the word was not used on the
occasion).

"Mawlana Muhammad Ali also stated that there were two nations in India. It was this
idea which was given poetic expression by Allama Muhammad Iqbal" (p. 261).

In which book did Iqbal give "poetic expression" to the two-nation theory? I have been
reading Iqbal for 45 years but have not come across any poem on the topic.

"By the historic Lahore Resolution of March 23 1940 ... The Muslims demanded a
separate homeland" (p. 269).

Read 24 March for 23 March, and "independent states" for "a separate homeland".

Urdu "remains her high-level lingua franca, still the working instrument for most
Government affairs and for inter-connection between the two wings in [1989]" (p. 287).

Three mistakes require correction. First, my dictionary tells me that historically lingua
franca (which has been naturalized into English and does not need the italics) is a
mixture of Italian, French, Greek and Spanish, used in the Levant; and in its wider
meaning, any language serving as medium between different peoples (The Concise
Oxford Dictionary). Did Urdu serve as a medium of communication between West
Pakistanis and East Pakistanis? The answer is no. English was used for this purpose.
The adjective "high-level" for the lingua franca is meaningless. Secondly, Urdu was not
in 1989 or before that at any time "the working instrument for most Government
affairs". Administration and higher judiciary and army used English; as they do today.
Thirdly, it is impossible to believe (even for the bigwigs of the Tahrik-i-Takmil-i-
Pakistan, which aims fondly at uniting Bangladesh and Pakistan) that in 1989 Pakistan
had two wings; that is, East Pakistan was still a part of Pakistan. The description is out
of date by a mere 18 years.

"The Revolution of October 1958 was unique in the sense that it was entirely bloodless
and it had the backing of the people" (p. 302).

The coup of 1958 was not a "Revolution". It might have been bloodless because the
nation was spineless, but the people did not back it. They accepted it because they were
afraid of what the army would do to them. Submission or acquiescence dictated by fear
is neither support nor approval.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 103



"Finding no other alternative President Ayub in a letter addressed to General A.M.
Yahya Khan, Commander-in-Chief, Pakistan Army requested him to take over reins of
the country as he had failed to tackle the grave situation" (p. 327).

The alternative, nay the prescribed constitutional requirement, was to transfer power to
the Speaker of the National Assembly. Ayub did not do it, probably because, apart from
other reasons mentioned earlier, the Speaker happened to be a Bengali.

Iqbal "proceeded to England for higher studies where he obtained his Banister-at-Law"
(p. 350).

"Obtained his Barrister-at-Law" is as asinine a statement as "obtained his lawyer or
engineer or doctor". To become a banister is not to complete one's higher studies. There
are many examples of mere matriculates becoming banisters, like Jinnah.

Jinnah "received his degree in Law" from England (p 351). Jinnah did not receive any
degree in law from England. He was called to the bar, and that was all.

"Allama Iqbal stressed the need for a separate homeland for Muslims in his address of
annual Session of Muslim League at Allahabad in 1930. Finally in the 1940 annual
session of the Muslim League held at Lahore in the Minto (now Iqbal) Park, a demand
for the division of the sub-continent into two independent states was made" (p. 356).

Iqbal did not even mention a separate homeland at Allahabad, not to speak of stressing
the need for it. In the second sentence, read "independent states" for "two independent
states".

The Lahore Resolution was passed "on 23rd March 1940. By this resolution the Muslims
of the sub-continent demanded a separate homeland" (p. 359).

Read 24 March for 23 March. The resolution did not demand "a separate homeland" but
"independent states".

After the 1970-elections "unfortunately the country fell a victim to political crisis and
foreign conspiracies. Bharat attacked Pakistan with the blessings of Russia. The result
was the fall and succession of East Pakistan in December 1971" (p. 380).

See Chapter 2 for the 1971 break-up of Pakistan.

The 1973 Constitution "is still in force (June, 1979)" (p. 380).

Even General Ziaul Huq did not claim that. The constitution, in his own words, was "in
abeyance", whatever that meant.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 104



Chaudhry Rahmat Ali's "name is known in History the word 'Pakistan' for giving it to
the Muslim State in the Sub-continent [sic.]" (p. 387).

The professor's English has gone berserk here.

"Sir Fazal Husain was a member of the Round Table Conferences" (p. 390).

Sir Fazl-i-Husain was neither a delegate to nor a member of the Round Table
Conferences. Throughout the years of the Conferences he was Member for Education of
the Viceroy's Executive Council and lived in New Delhi and Simla, and for a few
months in Abbotabad on sick leave. He did not even visit London during this period.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 105



CHAPTER 2

THE CALAMITY OF ERRORS

The Catalogue of Mistakes

At the end of my perusal of these textbooks I compiled a list of the errors they
contained. The number of the items crossed the century mark. On reflection I decided
not to present to my reader a straight and bare list: empty repetition may be an
efficacious means of brainwashing, but it dulls the impact. To underline the significance
and gravity of the situation I have re-arranged the more serious transgressions under
the following rubrics.

Wrong Dates. The Lahore Resolution was passed on 23 March 1940. Pakistan came into
being on 14 August 1947. The Muslim League was founded in 1905. The Round Table
Conferences met in 1913. Iqbal gave his Allahabad address in 1931. The Nehru Report
was submitted in 1926. The All India Muslim League Legislators Convention met in
Delhi in 1949. Pakistan State took its birth on 27 June 1947. (The last five statements
occur in one book, that by Rafiullah Shehab). The Sindh Provincial Muslim League
Conference met in Karachi in October 1936. The Lucknow Pact was signed in 1910.

Wrong Assertions. Jinnah received a degree in law in England. Jamaluddin Afghani
belonged to Afghanistan and was born there. Iqbal took his Doctorate in Philosophy in
England. Iqbal received his "degree of Bar-at-Law" from the University of Cambridge.
Iqbal took his "degree of Barristery" from the University of Oxford. Iqbal was educated
at the University of London. In north-India Hindu and Muslim dress was the same.
Sayyid Ahmad Khan demanded a separate Muslim State. Nawab Muhsinul Mulk led
the Simla Deputation. The Simon Commission was boycotted by both the Congress and
the Muslim League. The men of Pakistan wear shalwar, qamiz and shirwani. Before 1947
Saudi Arabia had great sympathy for the freedom movement of the Muslims of India.
The Punjab Unionist Party opposed the creation of Pakistan. In 1945 Lord Attlee became
the Prime Minister of Britain. Rahmat Ali gave the name Pakistan to Iqbal's 1930
scheme. Rahmat Ali took his "Barrister ki degree" from the University of Dublin. Rahmat
Ali is buried in Woking. Rahmat Ali's plan was rejected by the Muslim delegates to the
Round Table Conference. In the 1971 India-Pakistan war the Indian forces were
defeated everywhere. In 1969 General Yahya Khan promulgated a new constitution for
the country. The Lahore Resolution was amended by an All India Muslim League
annual session held in Delhi in 1946. Mawlana Muhammad Ali took his honours degree
in English Literature from the University of Oxford. Sayyid Ahmad Khan stayed in
England for nine years, from 1869 to 1878. Jinnah was elected Governor General of
Pakistan by the people of the country. Sayyid Ahmad Khan founded the Aligarh

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 106



Muslim University. The people of Pakistan were so pleased with Ayub Khan that they
gave him a higher army rank. E.S. Montagu is generally spelt as Montague, and
occasionally called Lord Montague. Mawlana Muhammad Ali convened the All India
Muslim Parties Conference in January 1929. The Eastern Times of Lahore is called The
Western Times. Rahmat Ali was a man of letters and a journalist. The Confederacy of India
by "A Punjabi" is translated as Wafaq-i-Hind. Fazl Karim Khan Durrani is called Farzand
Khan Durrani. The Treaty of Sevres is always written in Urdu as the Treaty of Saiwray.
In 1933, Rahmat Ali demanded the separation of all Muslim-majority areas from India.
The Muslim League legislators convention of 1946 is said to have been a meeting of all
Muslim legislators. Mian Fazl-i-Husain was a member of the Round Table Conference.

Wrong and Biased Assertions. In 1965 India-Pakistan war India sued for peace after
having been defeated soundly by Pakistan. In 1947 the Hindus and Sikhs massacred
many Muslims (without any mention of similar riots in Pakistan). Urdu was the spoken
language of the entire South Asia. Urdu is the only language which is spoken or
understood today from Peshawar to Raskumari. It is a special characteristic of Urdu
that the words of other languages included in it do not appear alien but look as if they
belonged originally to it. Urdu is understood all over the country; in fact, it was ihe
lingua franca of the subcontinent and
may perhaps even now be serving India as such. Bharat (India) is the country of non-
Muslims. Liaquat Ali Khan was given the title of Quaid-i-Millat by the nation. The
British captured India by deceit and cunning.

Confused and Confusing Assertions. There was nothing common or shared between
Hindus and Muslims in India (Sindh, Class 5); living in one place Hindus and Muslims
came very close to each other and mixed together well (Sindh, Class 6). Pakistan is the
fortress of Islam. The courts of law keep order and peace in the district; (on the next
page) the Police keeps order and peace in the district (Class 3). Sayyid Ahmad Khan is
the greatest thinker of Pakistan.

Ignorant, Biased and Confusing Assertions. Shaikh-ul-Hind Mahmud Hasan and Maududi
were among the founders of the ideology of Pakistan. The revolt of 1857 was a War of
Independence or the first War of Independence.

Completely Incomprehensible Assertions. The Lahore Resolution demanded one Muslim
State. The Lahore Resolution demanded two Muslim States. The 1956 Constitution was
abrogated before it could become operative.

Errors of Omission. The Red Shirts Movement of the NWFP and the Unionist Party of the
Punjab are not mentioned in chapters on these provinces. The 1971 break-up of Pakistan
is dismissed in a few lines or one paragraph, and is always made out to be the result of
an Indian invasion. The All India Muslim Leagues original aim and object of
encouraging loyalty to the British Government is generally omitted. The Bengalis' role

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 107



in the political, educational and cultural history of Muslim India is ignored. There is no
mention of martial law in most of the school books. The fact that the Simla Deputation
demanded weightage is not told to the students; only the demand for separate
electorates is mentioned.

Errors of Commission. In 1930 Iqbal demanded a separate and independent Muslim State
in the north-west of India. In 1930 Iqbal demanded a separate and independent Muslim
State made of all Muslim-majority areas of India. The Indian National Congress was a
Hindu political party. The Lucknow Pact was a great triumph for the Muslims, the
Muslim League and Jinnah. The 1977 coup is justified and the resulting military rule is
praised. In 1937 the Indian National Congress won the provincial elections by chance.
All credit for the political and intellectual awakening of Muslim India is given to the
Aligarh movement. The Ayub Khan coup of 1958 is called a Revolution. The Sarnia
Millia Islamia, Delhi, was founded to promulgate and propagate Islamic teachings (its
pro-Congress and anti-Muslim League role is not even hinted at). The services of
Deoband in the cause of the Pakistan movement are unforgettable. The Aligarh
movement made the Muslims economically affluent.

Corrections

These eight categories of errors open our eyes to the various ways in which history has
been manipulated polluted ill-used and trampled underfoot. Every means of
destruction has been employed to achieve the purpose. There are plain ties, things
which have absolutely no existence in reality or fact. There are deviations of all kinds:
lapses, flaws, self-deception, wishful thinking, subjective views, warped notions, loose
arguments, pre-conceived ideas, parochialism, superficiality, misjudgment, misbelieve,
oversight, slips of pen, inattentiveness, and aberrations of every variety. There are mists
of errors and eccentricity which conceal the facts. There is a general blankness of mind
which wallows in ignorance. The adult reader of these textbooks can only stand and
stare at the drift, shift and swing away from the truth, and slowly sink into a state of
mental numbness. To imagine the effect they have on the plastic, inquisitive, observant.
alert mind of the young student is to contemplate dark despair.

What the books lack are judgment, knowledge, perception, understanding, learning,
scholarship, consistency of thought, rigor, attention to truth, precision, accuracy,
validity, high fidelity to fact, exactitude and clarity — in short, every quality that a
textbook should possess. If any attempt has to be made to improve, revise and correct
them, to restore them to a state of usefulness, and to heal the wounds they have
inflicted on the students, the task of recasting and remodeling them has to be taken in
hand. Before any remedial steps are planned we must scrutinize their ways of errancy.
In other words, we must point out where they have gone astray and which true paths
they have missed in their journey to disaster.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 108



In the last chapter. while annotating each textbook, I listed the errors found in each
volume, and in several cases also corrected them. But there are certain mistakes, both of
fact and presentation, which occur so often that had I tried to rectify them on the spot I
would have repeated myself ad nauseam to the boredom of my readers. Then there are
other faults which are related to the interpretation of historical developments, and they
require a longer treatment, not just a change of date or name.

I have written this chapter to put the record straight; to balance the destructive criticism
of Chapter 1 with the constructive correction of the present one. What I have done is
this. I have selected the most vulgar and flagrant mistakes and addressed myself to two
tasks: to point out the dimensions and implications of the error made, and to supply the
correct version. In doing this, at some places I have gone into details because without
them the gravity of the statement made in the textbook cannot be gauged; at others I
have provided the correct version in brief so that it can be compared with what the
book says; and at still others I have confined my remarks to a short rebuttal of the
book's argument.

I have borrowed one technique from the books under examination: repetition; but with
a different goal in view. I don't want to brainwash my readers, but to make my
comments as clear as possible. I don't want to leave open any avenue which might lead
to misunderstanding or misconstruction. Therefore, some of the corrections marked in
Chapter I are iterated or elaborated here. I ask the reader to bear with this repetition in
the interest of clarity.

In what follows I have used a uniform method in arranging the material. In each of the
sections the first paragraph contains direct quotations from or literal paraphrases of the
matter published in the textbooks (there is no need to enclose them within quotation
marks; this should be taken for granted), the succeeding paragraphs make up my
corrections and commentary.

The Events of 1857

It was the war of independence (all provinces, Federal Government, private authors,
Urdu and English. all classes). It was the first war of independence (Sindh, English,
class 5). It was the Muslims' last war for freedom (Federal Government, English,
intermediate).

To understand the nature of the mutiny or uprising we must survey briefly the years
1759-1857. Shah Alum II came to the Mughal throne in 1759. Disappointed with the
disloyal and selfish policy of the Nawab Vizier of Oudh. Shuja-ud-Dawla, the Mughal
emperor, appealed to the East India Company for help in regaining his sovereignty. His
letters to the British make a painful reading. He was afraid of the Marhattas and too
weak to face them alone. He applied to Clive for aid: when this was refused he begged

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 109



for asylum in Calcutta. The request was turned down. After waiting for a more
favorable reply in Allahabad and realizing that it would never come, he finally joined
Mir Qasim against the British. But he took no part in the Battle of Buxar of 1764. He
himself gave away in bits and pieces the sovereignty which he had asked the British to
safeguard. He confirmed British properties in Bombay, Madras and the Northern
Sarkars, and awarded the diwani of Bengal. Bihar and Orissa to the British under the
Treaty of Allahabad of 1765.

In 1787 Shah Alam wrote personal letters to Lord Comwallis. the Governor General,
addressing him affectionately as "my son" and seeking his help in crushing his own
nobles who were making his life difficult. Cornwallis ignored the pitiable appeals. Then
Shah Alam turned to Afghanistan, and in 1796 wrote to King Zaman Shah, inviting him
to India to chastise the Mughal nobility. There was no response to the letter. Ultimately,
it was a Hindu, Sindhia, who came to the rescue, marched to Delhi and dealt with
Ghulam Qadir Rohilla.

The new Governor General, Lord Wellesley, realizing the weakness of the Mughal
Empire, decided to put it in its place. He ordered General Lake to conquer the north in
1803. Sindhia was defeated and Shah Mans was brought under British control. The
Mughal emperor spent his last days as a British pensioner in Delhi, where he died on 19
November 1806.

When Akbar II came to the throne he knew that he was a king only in name. Even his
capital's administration had passed on into the hands of the British Resident. The next
Governor General. Warren Hastings, put an end even to the fiction of Mughal
sovereignty. His seal did not carry the phrase proclaiming the Governor General as a
servant of the Mughal Emperor. When the Emperor asked for an interview with the
Governor General, he was granted one on the condition that all ceremonial betokening
his sovereignty over the British would be waived. In 1827 the Emperor received the new
Governor General, Amherst, without any ceremonial. In 1835 the British withdrew the
old coins issued by Shah Alam in 1778; the new coins bore the British monarch's image
and superscription. Already, in 1807 Akbar Il had requested the British for a raise in his
pension.

When Bahadur Shah Zafar ascended the throne in 1837 he knew who was the master.
He lived in the palace whose walls marked the boundaries of his rule. He was not even
free to select his heir-apparent. When in 1856 Mirza Fakhruddin died, the Emperor
wanted to nominate Jiwan Bakht as his successor, and sent a petition to the British for
their approval of his choice. No reply was received. During the events of 1857 he
adopted an ambivalent attitude and at first refused to lead the rebels. and offered to
negotiate with the British. It was later that he agreed to associate himself with the
uprising.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 110



Hakim Ahsanullah Khan and Mahbub Ali Khan, both of whom enjoyed the Emperor's
confidence, were in alliance with the British. When the rebels appealed for food, money
and equipment, the two nobles refused to oblige them. Ahsanullah Khan maintained
correspondence with the British officers in Meerut till the last week of May 1857.

What happened in 1857 certainly began as a mutiny, but later developed into something
which may be called an insurrection (rising in open resistance to established authority),
incipient rebellion, rising (insurrection), uprising (rebellion), revolt (rising,
insurrection), or emeure (first "e" accented, popular rising). A mutiny is an open revolt
against constituted authority, especially of soldiers against their officers. All definitions
are from the Oxford Concise Dictionary.

The main threats of the revolt were Delhi and pans of the United Provinces. Sporadic,
casual and unorganized activity occurred in some other areas. The rest of India stayed
calm, loyal and indifferent. Most of the native princes, including the Nizam, supported
the British by word and deed. The Sikhs stood steadfast on the British side, as did the
vast majority of Punjabi, Pathan and Sindhi Muslims.

Leading Indian historians are not convinced that the revolt can be called national in any
sense. Surendra Nath Sen, in his Eighteen Fifty Seven (Calcutta, 1958). says, "Outside
Oudh and Shahbad there are no evidences of that general sympathy which would
invest the Mutiny with the dignity of a national war". R.C. Majumdar, in his The Sepoy
Mutiny and the Revolt of 1857 (Calcutta. 1963), declares that "it cannot be regarded as a
national rising, far less a war of independence, which it never professed to be". The
Pakistani historian, S. Moinul Haq, in his The Great Revolution (Karachi, 1968), not only
calls it a revolution and a war of independence but also "the first major attempt of an
eastern people to throw off the domination of a western power". History supports the
Indian view.

General Bakht Khan, the rebel commander and a descendant of the Mughal royal
family, was serving in the British army as a subahdar in the artillery at the time of the
uprising. In Bengal the British were in complete control. Mutinies by the sepoys at
Barrackpore and Berhampore in February 1857 had been suppressed without much
difficulty. There was no further trouble. The Muhammadan Association of Bengal,
which represented the well-to-do educated of the community, issued a fatwa in favor of
the British. Sayyid Ahmad Khan refused to side with the rebels, and extended his full
support, verbal and practical, to the East India Company which employed him. Mirza
Ghalib, the poet, did not hide his pro-British leanings. In his Dastambu he was critical of
those who conducted the hostilities. Naturally, because since 1806 he had been in
receipt of a pension from the British. During the mutiny he gave up the use of the titles
which had been bestowed on him by the Mughal court. He also wrote a number of
qasidas in praise of the British rulers: one addressed to Lord Hardinge on the conquest
of the Punjab (regretting that his old age did not allow him to take part in the fighting),

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 111



another to Lord Ellenborough, another to Lord Canning, another to the Government for
taking over the control of India from the East India Company, and a long one to Queen
Victoria begging for an appointment as a court poet in London (request turned down).
He described the rising as a rastkhez-i-beja, denounced the "natives" who revolted
against the British, calling them "rebels" and "disloyal elements". He thought the British
were fully justified in killing even the dogs and cats of the "natives" (Dastambu). In his
taqriz (a kind of a foreword) to a new edition of Ain-i-Akbari brought out by Sayyid
Ahmad Khan he lauded British culture and institutions.

Other great figures of Urdu poetry had been admirers of the British. Mir Taqi Mir, in his
last days, was an applicant for a job at the Fort William College, Calcutta, but was not
selected. He also agreed to publish the first edition of his collection of verses under the
auspices of this College. Momin Khan Momin received Rs. 25 a month as a stipend from
the British.

Thus there was a general pro-British sentiment both among the educated classes and
the common man almost everywhere. A war of independence presupposes unity,
planning, forethought, organization, mass support and an agreed goal. All these
attributes were lacking in the India of 1857. The titular head of the revolt, and by
implication the prospective ruler if the British were thrown out, was the Mughal
emperor who was a reluctant recruit to the uprising and a pensioner of the British. His
relationship with the British, like that of his two predecessors, was one of slave and
master. When a slave chooses to disobey and stand up against his owner, the ensuing
fight is not a war of independence, though it might be a struggle for manumission.
Anyway, would he have been acceptable as the supreme lord of the subcontinent to the
Marhattas and the Jata and the Rohillas and the Sikhs who had been breaking up the
empire since the middle of the eighteenth century, and to the King of Oudh and the
Nizam of Hyderabad who had revolted against him and created their own little
kingdoms?

Here is a conundrum for the textbook writers. If it was a war of independence waged
by the Muslims against the hated British foreigner, how can Sir Sayyid Ahrnad Khan,
who sided with the British and condemned the native rising, be presented to the
students as a "great hero" and "the greatest thinker of Pakistan"?

The catchwords "first war of independence" and "last war for freedom" are beneath
serious notice.

Indian National Congress

In 1885 the Hindus founded their own political party, the Indian National Congress
(Punjab, class 6). The object of the establishment of the Indian National Congress was to
organize the Hindus politically (Punjab, class 8). The Hindus established the INC in

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 112



1885 (Sindh, English, class 6). INC was founded by Lord Hume (Federal Government,
English, intermediate). INC is called All India National Congress (NWFP, classes 9-10;
private. Lahore, English, intermediate; private, Lahore, B.A.).

Apart from giving the Congress a wrong title, the assertions commit three mistakes of
substance. Indians, not Hindus exclusively, organized the Congress. Nowhere in the
report of the proceedings of the inaugural session is it said that its aim was to bring the
Hindus together on one political platform. Nor was it founded by "Lord Hume", nor
was Hume a peer of the realm.

No doubt the Congress was predominantly a Hindu body, partly because the Hindus
were in a majority in India, and partly because it followed policies (mainly fashioned or
inspired by Tilak and Gandhi) which were not palatable to many Muslims. Yet to call it
a Hindu body is political abuse, not historical verity. Throughout, it had Muslims on its
roll. More importantly, several top ranking and highly respected Muslim figures
occupied for many years leading places in the counsels of the party: Rahmatullah M.
Syani, Badruddin Tayabji, Abul Kalam Azad, Mawlana Mohammad Ali. Hakim Ajmal
Khan. Mazharul Haq. Sir Ali Imam, Dr. M.A. Ansari, Dr. Saifuddin Kitchlew, and,
above all, Quaid-i-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah. Were these eminent persons cat's-
paws, tools and agents of the Hindus? Cheap political slogans should have no place in
textbooks. They falsify history and poison the young minds.

The Simla Deputation

It was led by Nawab Muhsinul Mulk (Punjab, class 8).

In fact, it was led by the Aga Khan, who was specially summoned back to India from
Aden. while on his way to Europe, to head the deputation.

Most books confine themselves to the statement that the deputation demanded separate
electorates. without mentioning the equally important petition for weightage. To see the
demands of the deputation in clearer light it is necessary to look at its background.

In the elections of 1892, out of the candidates recommended by the various electoral
bodies for the Central Council the Muslims obtained only about half the number to
which their numerical strength entitled them. For the Council of the United Provinces
not a single Muslim had been recommended. When, therefore, it was known that the
British Government was contemplating reforms for India which would introduce a
larger element of representation, the Muslims took a deputation to the Viceroy. Lord
Minto, to argue their case for separate representation on all local and provincial elected
bodies. This claim was based on three grounds. (1) In the existing state of tension
between Hindus and Muslims, no Muslim who sincerely represented the opinions of
his community could secure election in a general electorate, since in all but two

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 113



provinces Muslims were a minority of the population. (2) If the two communities were
not kept apart at the polls, every contested election would result in communal riots,
accompanied by bloodshed, and would leave bitter memories which would retard the
political integration of the country. (3) Where the system of a separate electorates had
been established, as in municipalities and district boards, it had worked well and
secured peace.

Simultaneously, the deputation also made a plea for weightage, i.e., the concession of
more seats to the Muslims than their population figures warranted. This demand was
supported by another set of three arguments: (1) Muslims still owned much of the
landed property in India. (2) They constituted a very large proportion of the Indian
Army. (3) They were, geographically speaking, the gatekeepers of India.

All India Muslim League

It was established at some time after 1911 (NWFP, class 8). It was established in 1905
(private, Lahore, English, junior classes). It was established in December 1906 in Dacca.

There is a dishonest suppression of truth in at least one book (NWFP, intermediate) in
recording the aims and objects of the All India Muslim League as adopted at the time of
its foundation. The League, say the textbooks, was organized to bring the Indian
Muslims together on one political platform. But this was only one of the three original
objects. The League document listed the ideals and aims as follows:

"(a) To promote, among the Musalmans of India, feelings of loyalty to the British
Government, and to remove any misconceptions that may arise as to the intention of
[the] Government with regard to any of its measures.

(b) To protect and advance the political rights and interests of the Musalmans of
India, and to respectfully represent their needs and aspirations to the Government

(c) To prevent the rise, among the Musalmans of India, of any feeling of hostility
towards other communities, without prejudice to the other aforementioned objects of
the League."

London Muslim League and Iqbal

Iqbal, in collaboration with Sayyid Ameer Ali, organized the London Muslim League
(Punjab, class 7).

There is no evidence to support this claim in the papers of the All India Muslim League
and the London Muslim League. Iqbal was a member of the LML and also served on its
committee, and that is all. He was not even an officer-bearer. Ameer Ali was the

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 114



president. C.A. Latif ordinary vice-president, Ibn-i-Ahm ad honorary secretary, Abdul
Ali Anik honorary treasurer, Zahur Ahmad joint secretary, and Masudul Hasan
assistant secretary and assistant treasurer.

We must remember that Iqbal only a student when LML was established on 6 May
1908, and within four months of the event he left England for India. The wording of the
textbook claim is an attempt to make us believe that Iqbal was the real founder and
Ameer Ali a mere collaborator. Such absurd and puerile efforts to paint Iqbal greater
than he was do no service to him. Iqbal was a great man and does not need stilts. It will
be an act of kindness to him, and also of some benefit to history, not to burden him with
unnecessary honors.

Lucknow Pact

It was signed in 1910 (private, Karachi, B.A.). It was a triumph for the Muslims (NWFP.
classes 9-10); it enhanced their importance (NWFP, intermediate); it was a victory for
the Muslim League (Federal Government, B.A.); under it the Congress accepted the
Muslim League as the representative party of the Muslims (private, Lahore, B.A.);
under its terms the Hindus accepted the Muslims as a separate nation (private, Lahore,
B.A., in three different textbooks).

The Lucknow Pact has an interesting history. The terms on behalf of the Muslim League
were first considered by the League Council in its meeting in Lucknow on 21 August
1916. Only nine men attended the meeting, all belonging to Lucknow. The terms were
finalized at another Council meeting held on 11 October in which only eight men were
present, seven from Lucknow and one from Allahabad. The Congress-League Joint
Reform Committee met in Calcutta on 17-18 November. The total attendance was 71;
there were 20 from the League (12 from Bengal, 4 from U.P., 1 each from Bihar, NWFP,
Madras and 1 -unknown). Representation quotes were settled for all provinces except
Bengal and U.P. (Punjab's fate had been decided without any Punjabi being present).
The pending cases were sorted out in a meeting held on 25-28 December, in which
Bengali Muslims were not present in strength and the U.P. Muslims dominated the
proceedings. The Congress and League concurrent sessions at Lucknow which ratified
the agreement showed incomprehensible membership figures. Of the 433 Muslims who
went to the Congress session, over 400 were stooges from Lucknow. At the League
session, there were few delegates from Bombay except the President himself (Jinnah),
Madras was almost entirely unrepresented. Bengal had a few spokesmen and so had
the Punjab. The U.P., or rather its "Young Party", soled the roast.

Under the Pact the Muslims received the following representation in the provincial
councils:

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 115



Percentage of Muslims in Muslim Percentage of
Province

Population Seats in Councils
Bengal 52.6 40.0
Bihar and Orissa 10.5 25.0
Bombay 20.4 33.3
Central Provinces 4.3 15.0
Madras 6.5 15.0
Punjab 54.8 50.0
United Provinces 14.0 30.0

The figures speak for themselves. Any sensible politician should have seen that they
heralded the doom of the two largest Muslim-majority provinces. Contemporary
newspapers show how strongly same Bengali and Punjabi Leaguers reacted to the
injustice meted out to their provinces. Weightage of the heaviest variety given to small
Muslim minorities in Bihar and C.P. and Madras and U.P. did not in any manner help
the Muslims of India: it did not even help the recipients except to give them a hollow
confidence. On the other hand, the deprivation imposed upon the Punjab and Bengal
sealed their fate. In Bengal there were unstable ministries, political uncertainty and the
weird spectacle of a Muslim League-Hindu Mahasabha coalition. The Punjab was saved
from such hazards by the establishment of the Unionist Party.

At no time or place during the protracted negotiations for the Pact did the Congress or
the Hindus accept, even through an oblique NM the Muslims as a separate nation.

Far from being a victory of the Muslims or the Muslim League the Pact was a disaster
for Muslim India for all the years until 1947.

The Punjab Unionist Party

The Punjab played an important party in the nationalist struggle. In the beginning,
some Muslim leaders kept away from the Muslim League for the sake of their personal
gain and because of their links with the British, and they joined the Unionist Party and
opposed the creation of Pakistan (Punjab, classes 9-10). Other textbooks don't even
mention the Unionist Party.

The Punjab National Unionist Party was established in April 1927. Among its founding
fathers were Sir Muhammad Iqbal, Malik Firoz Khan Noon, Sir Rahim Baldish,
Chaudhri Zafrullah Khan, Sardar Sikandar Hayai Khan, Shaikh Abdul Qadir, and
Nawab Shahnawaz Khan of Mamdot. The inspiration came from Mian Fazl-i-Husain.
The party was a child of the Lucknow Pact: with even one seat lost to the Congress, no
Muslim party could tom a government in the province. It ruled the Punjab for 20 years
with skill, efficiency and stability. In 1937 Jinnah, after two years of courtship,

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 116



persuaded Sikandar Hayat to enter into an agreement with the Muslim League on
Sikandar's terms. This pact was broken by the League much later when Khizr Hayat
Tiwana (Sikandar's successor) was asked to side with the League in contravention of the
terms of the agreement. They party did not oppose the creation of Pakistan till after
Khizr Hayat's expulsion from the League. If all these Unionist Muslims were selfish
stooges of the British why did the League go to humiliating extremes in cultivating
them and enlisting their support in the Punjab?

It was the supreme Unionist leader, Sir Fazl-i-Husain, who virtually dictated to the
Viceroy the names of Indian Muslim delegates to the three sessions of the Round Table
Conference, and we must remember that these spokesmen of Muslim India included
such names as the Aga Khan, Sir Muhammad Shafi, Iqbal and Jinnah. Nobody then or
even after that doubted the wisdom, political acumen and representative credentials of
these delegates. Pakistan owes much more to the Unionist Muslims than her textbook
writers and historians are aware of.

Boycott of the Simon Commission

The Simon Commission was boycotted by both the Indian National Congress and the
All India Muslim League (Punjab, class 8; private, Lahore, English, intermediate).

The Indian Statutory Commission, to give it its proper title, was appointed by the
British Government on 26 November 1927. It toured India twice: first, from 3 February
to 31 March 1928, and again from 11 October 1928 to 13 April 1929.

The All India Muslim League was split into two factions on the issue of cooperating
with the Commission. One group, led by Jinnah and popularly known as Jinnah
League, decided in favor of a boycott. The other, led by Sir Muhammad Shafi and
known as Shafi League, voted in favor of cooperation. The nineteenth annual session of
the All India Muslim League was consequently bifurcated. The Jinnah League held it in
Calcutta on 30 December 1927 - 1 January 1928, with the Maharaja of Mahmudabad in
the chair. The Shall League held it in Lahore on 1 January 1928, with Shall himself as
president. From contemporary newspaper reports and lists of delegates it is very
difficult to decide which faction better represented the Muslim sentiment. Leaving the
League alone, a very large number of Muslim political, social and religious groups and
parties met the Commission and submitted memoranda to it; their names,
representatives interviewed and submissions are listed in the relevant white paper.

It is, therefore, not true to say that the All India Muslim League boycotted the
Commission. The wrong claim is apparently tailored to fit the desired image of the
League as an anti-British body.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 117



Nehru Report

It was submitted in 1926 (private, Lahore, English, intermediate). Several other
textbooks refer to the Report in passing, without underlining its relevance to the
emergence of the sentiment of political separatism among the Muslims.

How could a report written to challenge the appointment of the Simon Commission be
published before the Simon Commission was named?

The Commission's appointment was announced on 26 November 1927. In his speech in
the House of Lords on the appointment of the Commission, the Secretary of State for
India. Lord Birkenhead, explained why no Indian had been put on the panel and
asserted that no unanimous report could be expected from a body with Indian
representation. This was resented by the Congress leaders, who immediately decided to
draft a constitution to confound the India Office.

In December 1927, in its annual session held in Madras the Congress asked all other
parties to join hands with it in preparing a constitution. As a result of this call an All-
Parties Conference met in Delhi in February-March 1928, with the Jinnah League
present and the Shafi league absent. Two committees were appointed, but they had
nothing to report when the Conference met in Bombay on 19 May 1928. Then the
Conference appointed a committee to do the work. This was the so-called Nehru
Committee named after the chairman, Pandit Motilal Nehru. Two Muslims were put on
it, Ali Imam and Shoib Qureshi. Both were unrepresentative of their community and
had long ago been repudiated by the great majority of the Muslims. Shortly afterwards
the Sikh member of the Committee was disowned by the Sikh League. The Indian
Christian Conference also dissociated itself from the principles adopted by the Report
on the protection of minorities.

The Committee published its report in August 1928. It recommended a fully responsible
system of government in which the majority (the Hindus) would be sovereign. Muslim
electorates were to be immediately abolished. The Muslims were shocked and almost
all Muslim parties protested against it.

The All-Parties Conference met in Lucknow on 28-31 August to consider the report, and
decided to convene an All-Parties Convention in December in Calcutta to elicit public
opinion. On 28 December the Convention rejected every single argument and demand
put forth by Jinnah in a forceful speech. Jinnah was chastened by the experience and
hastened to make peace with the Shafi League which had kept aloof from the
deliberations of these conferences and committees.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 118



The significance of the Nehru Report lies in the fact that it united the Muslims as
nothing else could have done at that time. All political differences and rivalries were
hushed. From this moment onwards there was nothing that could be called "Indian
nationalism".

Another consequence of the disillusionment with the Nehru Report was the
establishment of the All India Muslim Conference. Except Jinnah, every prominent and
influential Muslim figure attended the opening session of the Conference, and the
resolution passed by the session on the rights and demands of the Muslims served as
the basis for all negotiations with the British and the Congress at the Round Table
Conference and after.

Muhammad Ali and the All India Muslim Conference

Mawlana Muhammad Ali convened the All-Parties Muslim Conference in Delhi on 1
January 1929 (Federal Government, B.A.).

The date is wrong. It met on 31 December 1928 and 1 January 1929. In the official report
of the Conference Muhammad Ali's name does not appear as a signatory of the persons
who initiated the idea of convening such a conference and issued a manifesto from
Simla arguing in favor of the idea on 10 September 1928. Nor was Muhammad Ali an
office-bearer in the Conference. The Aga Khan was the president, Nawab Muhammad
Ismail Khan and Faz1 Ibrahim Rahimtoola secretaries, Khwaja Ghulam-us-Sibtain
financial secretary, and Muhammad Shafi Daudi working secretary. Muhammad Ali
was merely one of the nineteen-member Working Committee. Nor did he ever preside
over one of its annual sessions.

I am not aware of any All-Parties Muslim Conference called in Delhi on 1 January 1929
by Muhammad Ali.

Round Table Conference

The Round Table Conferences were held in 1913 (private, Lahore, English,
intermediate). There are other vague or confusing dates and years in some textbooks.

The Round Table Conference met in London in three sessions. The first was held from
12 November 1930 to 19 January 1931. the second from 7 September to 1 December
1931, and the third from 17 November to 24 December 1932.

Iqbal's Allahabad Address

Iqbal's Allahabad Address: 1930: Date: This address was delivered on 29 December 1931
(private, Lahore, English, intermediate).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 119



The year 1931 should read 1930.

Every textbook (federal or provincial or private, Urdu or English) from class 2 onwards
(congratulations to class 1 on their escape) asserts that in 1930 Iqbal demanded a
separate state for the Muslims. Before exposing this myth it is instructive to look at the
variations rung on the distortion; it might help to read the mind of the brainwashers.
All statements should be read as direct quotations.

Iqbal was the first to present the concept of the creation of Pakistan (private. Karachi.
class 2; NWFP, class 5; Sindh, class 5). He was the first Muslim to give the idea of
Pakistan (private, Karachi, English. classes 1-2). He was the first man to give the idea of
Pakistan (private, Lahore, English, class 3). He demanded that the Muslim-majority
regions of South Asia may be declared as Ian) independent Muslim state (Sindh,
English. class 5). He proposed the creation of an independent and free state made up of
all those areas where the Muslims were in a majority (NWFP, class 5; Sindh, class 5). He
demanded a separate Islamic state (NWFP, class 7). He demanded a separate Muslim
state (NWFP, class 8). He demanded a separate mamlakat for the Muslims of India
(NWFP, classes 9-10). He demanded a state for the Muslims (Punjab, classes 9-10). He
demanded a Muslim state (Sindh, classes 9-10). He was the first Muslim to put in words
the idea of Pakistan (private, Lahore, English, class 7). He conceived of a separate
Muslim state in the north-western and north-eastern parts of India where they were in a
majority (Sindh, English, class 8). He wanted a separate state for the Muslims of India
(Punjab, English, classes 9-10). He was the first person to present the idea of an
independent Muslim state (NWFP, intermediate). He strongly advocated the creation of
an Islamic state (Federal Government, English, intermediate). He discussed at length
the scheme for the partition of the subcontinent, and a resolution to this effect was also
passed in that session of the All India Muslim League (private. Lahore, English,
intermediate). He was the first thinker to offer the idea of a separate Muslim state on
positive and ideological grounds (Federal Government, B.A.). At the beginning of this
century he gave the Muslims the lesson of freedom and Islamic identity and then
suggested the creation of a separate mamlakat as a political solution (Federal
Government, B.A.). He presented the idea of a separate and independent homeland for
the Muslims of the subcontinent (private. Lahore, B.A.). He demanded a separate
independent homeland for the first time from a political platform (private. Lahore,
B.A.). He presented a scheme for the creation of an independent Islamic riasat in India
or outside it (private, Peshawar. B.A.). He presented the demand for a separate
mamlakat (private, Lahore, B.A.). He demanded a separate homeland (private, Lahore,
B.A.). He offered a scheme for a division of India (private, Lahore, BA.). He suggested
the creation of an Islamic mamlakat (Allama Iqbal Open University, B.A.). He was the
first to dream of a separate homeland for the Muslims of India (private, Lahore, English.
B.A.).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 120



First, a few silly points ought to be disposed of. Iqbal was speaking in English. To
attribute to hint in the Urdu translation the use of the work mamlakat is wrong on two
counts. First, he did not use it. Secondly, the root of the Urdu term connects it with

malukiat, which is monarchy or kingship. I am aware of the popular phrase Mamlakat-i-
Khudadad-i-Pakistan which is in much use among "patriotic" Pakistanis and
Islampasand Urdu writers of doubtful ability or knowledge. Iqbal was talking about a
modem political state, not about a monarchical institution.

Secondly, the textbook writers use the adjectives "Muslim" and "Islamic" as if they mean
the same thing. They do not. A Muslim state is one whose population is Muslim by
faith; there may be no religious minorities in such a state or some or many; but a clear
majority of the people should be Muslims. An Islamic state is quite a different thing, but
unfortunately impossible to define or describe. Every school and sect, and it seems that
even every 'alim, has its or his own concept of an Islamic state. Even Pakistani army
generals have strong views on the point.

Thirdly, Iqbal's proposal amounted to this: the Punjab, NWFP, Sindh and Baluchistan
should be merged to form one province of the proposed Indian federation. Nothing
more than this was suggested. His own letter published in The Times on 12 October 1931
confirms this. This is reinforced by his letter in Urdu sent to Raghib Ahsan. (Full details
and documentation in my A History of the Idea of Pakistan, Vanguard, Lahore, 1987, Vol.
l, Chapters 4, 5 and 6, pp. 184-327).

Fourthly, Iqbal did not even refer to Bengal. His proposal was confined to the north-
west of India. There is no warrant at all for saying that in 1930 he wanted a Muslim
state embracing all Muslim provinces or Muslim-majority areas.

Fifthly, even if it is presumed that he was proposing a division of India on religious
lines, three false claims have been made: (1) he was the first person to do so. (2) he was
the first person to do so from a political platform, and (3) he was the first Muslim to do
so. Answers: (1) exactly 64 such suggestions, vague or definite, were made between 24
June 1858 and 31 December 1929. (See the table in my A History of the Idea of Pakistan,
Vol. 3, pp. 671-680). (2) Nawab Zulfikar Ali Khan demanded a separate country for the
Muslims in the north-west and north-east of India in his address as Chairman of the
Reception Committee delivered at the All India Khilafat Conference session held in
Lahore on 31 December 1929. (3) Twenty-eight Muslims had made such proposals
before Iqbal's address (see the table referred to above).

Sixthly, the All India Muslim League session held in Allahabad at which Iqbal gave this
address did not pass any resolution about, on, for or against his proposal. It ignored

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 121



him completely. The Muslim League official proceedings of the session confirm my
statement.

The Making of the 1935 Reforms

The Round Table Conferences were held in 1913 (private, Lahore, English,
intermediate). Several other books give vague or confusing dates. Besides, a large
number of books declare that as a result of disagreement at the Round Table
Conferences the British imposed a new system on India in the shape of the Government
of India Act of 1935.

The Round Table Conference met in London in three sessions. The first was held from
12 November 1930 to 19 January 1931, the second from 7 September to I December 1931,
and the third from 17 November to 24 December 1932.

The statement that the 1935 reforms were enforced by the British against the will of the
Indians is a serious misrepresentation of facts. Consider the following developments.

The Simon Commission published its report in May 1930. In the fullness of its study, the
depth of souse of its observations, the lucidity of its argument, the realism and
reasonableness of its approach, it is a commendable essay in constitution making. The
Report was followed by the Round Table Conference. In the first session the Congress
was absent because it insisted that the Conference must not discuss whether India
should or should not receive responsible self-government but must shape a constitution
on the basis of a free India. All other parties attended, and most of the work was done
through the Federal Structure Sub-Committee. and gradually the federal plan took
shape and substance.

In the second session, which was attended by the Congress. the communal issue was
seriously tackled. The Aga Khan, Jinnah, Sir Muhammad Shaft and Zafarullah Khan
negotiated with Gandhi. But Gandhi, the sole Congress delegate to the Conference,
refused to consider any compromise until the Muslims accepted the Nehru Report in its
totality. Upon this all the minorities except the Sikhs drafted a joint demand of claims
and presented it to the British Government as their irreducible minimum. Muslim
demands were based on the resolutions passed by the All India Muslim Conference at
Delhi on 4 and 5 April 1931. In summary they were: residual powers with the
provinces: separation of Sindh from the Bombay Presidency; full autonomy for the
NWFP: reforms in Baluchistan; transfer of power direct to the provinces: separate
electorates; special Muslim weightage in all political bodies: constitutional sanction for
the enforcement of basic rights; safeguards against communal legislation; adequate
Muslim representation in public services; and amendment of the constitution with the
concurrence of the provinces.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 122



But the Hindu-Muslim problem remained unsolved, and it became clear that the British
Government would have to assume the difficult task of arbitration. It was impossible to
make any progress in constitution making without first determining the proportion of
Hindu and Muslim shares in the proposed legislatures.

The Congress was again absent from the thin] session. Some more discussions look
place. Most of the work was done through committees. Loose threads were tied up.

The results of the long labors of the three sessions were collected, sifted and
summarized in a White Paper issued in March 1933. It faithfully translated the measure
of agreement reached at the Conference. But the chief Muslim objection was that it
created a strong centre. A Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament was appointed
to consider the White Paper. Constitutionally this body was exclusively composed of
members of Parliament, but twenty representative Indians from British India and seven
from the States were appointed as assessors to the Committee. The five Muslim co-
optees were the Aga Khan, Sir Zafrullah khan. Sir Abdur Rahim. Sir Shafaat Ahmad
Khan and Sir A.H. Ghuznawi. The Committee was at work from April 1933 to
November 1934, and finally reported to Parliament on 22 November 1934. The report
was debated in the House of Commons on 10-12 December 1934, and the House of
Lords on 18 December. The second reading look place in February 1935. and after the
third reading the India Bill finally reached the statute book on 24 July 1935.

Never before had the British Parliament taken so long and worked so hard on a colonial
constitution. Never before had India figured so prominently and so consistently in
Hansard. Never again was British to lavish so much care and ability on India.

But the federation set up by the Act was of the closer rather than the looser type. Hindu
unitarianism prevailed, particularly in the composition of the federal legislature. The
Muslims objected to it because, to them, a strong centre meant an increase of Hindu
strength. The Muslim League found the federal scheme to be "fundamentally bad",
"most reactionary, retrograde, injurious and fatal", and rejected it. However, it
undertook to work the provincial part of the constitution "for what it was worth". The
Congress tamed down both the parts of the Act, but decided to contest elections and to
wreck the constitution from the inside; but later, tasting power for the first time, formed
provincial ministries.

The Elections of 1937

The Indian National Congress won the elections by chance (Punjab, classes 9-10).

The Congress score was as follows: Bengal Legislative Assembly, 54 out of a total of 250;
Bihar, 91 out of 152; Assam, 32 out of 108; Bombay, 87 out of 175; Madras, 159 out of
215; U.P., 134 out of 228; Punjab, 18 out of 175; NWFP, 19 out of 50; Orissa, 36 out of 60;

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 123



Sindh, 8 out of 60; C.P., 71 out of 112. Toral: 762 out of 1,771. The Muslim League won
54 seats out of 250 in Bengal, 4 out of 108 in Assam, 18 out of 175 in Bombay, 9 out of
215 in Madras, 26 out of 228 in U.P., 2 out of 175 in Punjab, 5 out of 112 in C.P., and
none in Bihar, NWFP, Orissa and Sindh (source: official white paper).

How this result can be attributed to "chance" passes my understanding. The Congress
was at this time a 52-year-old, well-established, disciplined, self-sacrificing and
superbly led party. In fact, it won less seats than public opinion and the party itself
expected.

Why can't Pakistani professors take election results as good, honest facts? Is it because
they live in a country where rigging or allegations of rigging are by now de rigueur?
Even the All India Muslim League or Jinnah did not utter a word which could be
interpreted as attributing the Congress victory to gratuity. All elections were honest
under British rule, and the League knew it.

Sindh Provincial Muslim League Conference

It met in Karachi in October 1936 (Federal Government, B.A.). A committee of the
Karachi Muslim Conference demanded a separate Muslim state (private, Lahore, B.A.).

It met on 8-13 October 1938; and it was not the Karachi Muslim Conference but the
conference convened by the Sindh Provincial Muslim League. As for what it demanded,
the following details should be a part of what the students learn.

In his address as Chairman of the Reception Committee Sir Abdullah Haroon said that
unless the communal problem was solved to Muslim satisfaction it would be
"impossible to save India from being divided into Hindu India and Muslim India, both
placed under separate federations". Jinnah, who was presiding. in his speech did not
endorse, ratify, confirm or support Haroon's idea. Notwithstanding Jinnah's snub, the
Sindh Muslim League leadership drafted and moved a resolution in the Subjects
Committee threatening that if the Congress did not behave the Muslims "would have
no alternative but to fall [back] on the Pakistan scheme", and spelling out the concept of
a separate Muslim federation. The Committee rejected this portion of the resolution,
omitting all references to a division of India; and the redrafted text was passed by the
session. The original draft had been prepared by Haroon and Ali Muhammad Rashdi in
collaboration with Shaikh Abdul Majid Sindhi. Not taking kindly to Jinnah's rebuke,
they released to the press the two texts of the resolution: the original and the revised.
Further, Abdul Majid Sindhi introduced the original resolution in the next All India
Muslim League session in Patna; it was thrown out.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 124



Lahore Resolution: The Date

Every textbook, irrespective of its origin, language and class, says that the Lahore
Resolution was passed or adopted on 23 March 1941); often repeating the inaccuracy
more than once.

The simple matter of the date on which the resolution was passed has been constructed
into a national and historical falsehood. Ali contemporary newspapers and
compilations of current developments and facts and figures agree on the following
timetable of the All Muslim League's 27th annual session held in Lahore.

The proceedings opened on 22 March at 3 P.M. The Nawab of Mamdot delivered his
address as Chairman of the Reception Committee. Then Jinnah gave his long extempore
speech. That was the end of the first day. On 23 March the session began at 3 P.M.
FazIul Haq introduced the Lahore Resolution and made a speech on it. Chaudhri
Khaliquzzaman seconded it and spoke for a while. Then Zafar Ali Khan. Sardar
Aurungzeb Khan and Abdullah Haroon made short speeches in support of the
Resolution. The proceedings were then adjourned to the following day. On 24 March
the session began at 11.15 A.M. Speeches on the Resolution were delivered by Nawab
Muhammad Ismail Khan of the United Provinces, Qazi Muhammad Isa of Baluchistan.
and Abdul Hamid Khan of Madras. At this stage Jinnah arrived, who had been engaged
elsewhere that morning, and occupied the presidential chair. Speeches on the
Resolution continued with Ismail Ibrahim Chundrigar of Bombay, Sayyid Abdur Rauf
Shah of the Central Provinces, and Dr. Muhammad Alam of the Punjab expressing their
enthusiastic support. Then Jinnah intervened and let Abdur Rahman Siddiqui introduce
his resolution on Palestine. Sayyid Raza Ali and Abdul Hamid Badayuni spoke in
support of it, and it was adopted by lire assembly. The session adjourned to meet again
at 9.00 P.M. The night meeting opened with the two remaining speeches on the Lahore
Resolution by Sayyid Zakir Ali and Beguni Muhammad Ali. It was then put to the vote
and declared lo be unanimously carried. Two more resolutions (on the Khaksars and on
amendments to the party constitution) were quickly moved and adopted. Finally, the
session elected office-bearers for the ensuing year. Jinnah made a short speech winding
up the proceedings. and the session concluded at 11.30 P.M.

Thus there is no room for the slightest doubt about the fact that the Lahore Resolution
was passed on 24 March. But no notice of the correct date has been taken by anyone in
Pakistan, including the Government which makes the nation celebrate the "Pakistan
Day" on the wrong dale. I cannot think of any plausible explanation for such massive
repudiation of an historical fact.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 125



Lahore Resolution: The Occasion

The resolution was adopted on 23 March 1940 in a big meeting of the Muslim League in
Lahore (NWFP, class 4). On 23 March Jinnah held a meeting in Lahore and explained to
the Muslims the idea of having a separate homeland for them (Punjab, class 4).

Don't the writers feel obliged to tell the tots in their charge that it was not an ordinary
meeting called by Jinnah but the annual session of the All India Muslim League?

Lahore Resolution: The Meaning

By far the most important document of the entire Pakistan movement has been
misquoted, misconstrued, misinterpreted and distorted by all textbooks whether
ordered by the government or written by teaching professors. The more serious
examples of this tampering must be quoted in order to assess the depth of the confusion
instilled into the minds of the students. My quotations are direct:

It demanded two independent states in the subcontinent (private, Karachi, English,
class 5). It demanded a separate independent state in South Asia for the Muslims
(Sindh, class 5). It demanded a separate free homeland (Punjab, class 6). It demanded a
free and independent state which should carry the name of Pakistan (Sindh, class 6). It
demanded a separate homeland for the Muslims of India (NWFP, class 7).1t demanded
a separate independent Islamic government [hakumat] (Sindh, class 7). It demanded one
independent hakumat and one independent mamlakat (NWFP, class 8). It demanded a
separate independent state (Sindh, class 8). It demanded an independent and free
Muslim state (NWFP, classes 9-10). It demanded a homeland for the Muslims of the
subcontinent (Punjab, classes 9-10). It demanded their [Muslims'] separate homeland
(Sindh, classes 9-10). It announced that the Muslim areas were to fonts an independent
and sovereign state (Sindh, English, class 6). It demanded an independent and
sovereign Muslim state (Sindh, English, class 8). It demanded a separate Muslim state
(private, Lahore, English, intermediate). It asked for the creation of a separate state for
the Muslims (Federal Government, B.A.). It demanded a separate homeland (private,
Lahore, B.A.). It laid claim to a separate homeland; it demanded the division of the
subcontinent into two independent states (private, Lahore, English, B.A.).

Let us look at the original source before commenting on the nonsense quoted above.
The operative section of the Lahore Resolution, as it was officially published by the All
India Muslim League office, runs as follows:

"Resolved that it is the considered view of this session of the All India Muslim League
that no constitutional plan would be workable in this country or acceptable to the
Muslims unless it is designed on the following basic principles, viz., that geographically

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 126



contiguous units are demarcated into regions which should be so constituted, with such
territorial readjustments as may be necessary, that the areas in which the Muslims are
numerically in a majority, as in the North-Western and Eastern zones of India, should be
grouped to constitute 'Independent States' in which the constituent units shall be
autonomous and sovereign." (The italics are mine).

The text is badly worded, clumsily drafted and employs five territorial terms of vastly
different shades of meaning without any attempt at defining them. It is incredible that a
country was demanded and won on the basis of a document of such vague, nebulous,
ambiguous, confused and fuzzy character. The words "Independent States" are put
within quotation marks. Why? Could there be a state which was not independent?
There are more puzzles. The last ten words announce that the constituent units of each
of these States "shall be autonomous and sovereign". The world "Shall" makes it a
definite and binding declaration. How can a state be made up of sovereign units? Are
autonomous and sovereign synonymous terms? The word "federation" is not used in
the Resolution. Were the north-western and north-eastern States to be unitary
structures? The demand is for States in the plural. No figure is given. Were the two
zones to become Iwo states or more?

I have posed these questions because I find no reference to these points in any textbook.
Al least on the college level, it was the duty of the writers to provide some textual
criticism of the Resolution and discuss the difficulties in the way of understanding it.
But this assumes that the authors had read the Resolution. They had done nothing of
the sort. This judgment is made on the basis of what they declare to be the contents of
the Resolution.

The text of the Resolution is now before my readers. Do they, or can they with all the
effort at their command, find in the words of the Resolution the following nine
statements made by the various textbooks along with the assertion that they are
contained in the body of the Resolution? The Resolution demanded, they say:

(1) two independent states,
(2) a separate independent state,
(3) a separate free homeland.
(4) a free and independent state to be called Pakistan.
(5) a separate independent Islamic hakumat,
(6) one independent hakumat and one independent mumlakat,
(7) a homeland for the Muslims of India,
(8) a separate homeland,
(9) a division of India into two independent states

Evidently the books are not referring to the Lahore Resolution but to some other
unnamed declaration.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 127



This treatment of the Lahore Resolution raises a fundamental question. if the textbooks
can fabricate facts in the course of paraphrasing a definite, published, easily available
document, what atrocities on the truth they must have perpetrated in the field of
Pakistan's political developments where there are no original sources, where conflicting
opinions abound, and where patriotic, sectarian and ethnic interests jostle against each
other and cloud the horizon of history? What our children are being told is not even
half-truths. exaggerations, understatements, terminological inexactitudes. perversions,
disinformation, evasions, garbling and mutilations: they are falsehoods. whoppers,
concoctions, pious frauds, fables, fibs and fisherman's yarns. A moment to ponder, dear
reader, a moment to ponder, and to mourn the death of what we profess to live by —
haqq, the TRUTH which is the first teaching of Islam.

Lahore Resolution: Ignoramus

The following sentence is submitted to my readers as ready-made epitome of all the
errors one can possibly make, with some effort: The Pakistan Resolution was passed by
the Muslim League in a meeting held at Minto Park in Lahore on the 23rd March 1940:
it demanded an independent state (Punjab, English, classes 9-10). The author has a
research degree from the University of London; he retired honorably as a full professor
at the Government College, Lahore; and is at present principal of an elite English-
medium college in Lahore.

His feat of having assembled five mistakes of fact yet remains unsurpassed in the
annals of ignorance. There are no prizes for adult readers for spotting the inaccuracies;
though if I were an examiner I would quote this sentence and then ask the students
appearing in their M.A examination in history or political science to point out and
rectify all the mistakes in it, and I guarantee that a majority would not score passing
marks. I suspect that the same test given to our college and university teachers (forget
the poor school teachers) would produce similar results.

Now for the mistakes. (1) It was not the Pakistan Resolution but the Lahore Resolution.
(2) It was not a meeting, or even a special or extraordinary meeting, but the annual
session. (3) It was not passed by the Muslim League but by the All India Muslim
League, the parent body, the central organization. Even an above-average student of the
9th class (for whom the book has been prepared) might notice the words "Lahore" and
"Muslim League", and live with the impression that the resolution was passed by the
Punjab Muslim League or even the Lahore Muslim League. (4) It was not passed on 23
March, but on 24 March. (5) It did not demand an independent state; the word "States"
was used in the plural.

The resolution is so clumsily drafted that in the opinion of some careful scholars it is
debatable whether it demanded independent states or suggested some kind of a

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 128



confederation between the Indian state and the Muslim "States". But I will give the
author the benefit of the doubt and not press this point. His other mistakes are enough
to convict him.

Muslim League Legislators' Convention

The elected Muslim members of the Central and Provincial Assemblies held a
convention at Delhi in 1946 (Punjab, English, classes 9-10). The All India Muslim League
Legislators' Convention was held in Delhi on 9 April 1949 (private, Lahore, English,
intermediate). On 9 April 1946 a meeting of 5th) Muslim members of the central and
provincial assemblies revised the Lahore Resolution (private, Lahore, BA.). The Lahore
Resolution's "States" in the plural was corrected at a Muslim League session held on 9
April 1946 (private, Lahore, B.A.).

Each of the four statements made above are false. (1) They were not elected "Muslim
members", but Muslim members elected on the Muslim League ticket (2) The year was
1946, not 1949. The exact dates were 7-9 April, not just one day. (3) The same mistake as
in number 1. (4) It was not a Muslim League session, but a convention of Muslim
League Legislators.

Statements 3 and 4 also let pass the fact that the Convention committed a legal offence
in amending the Lahore Resolution. According to the constitution of the All India
Muslim League all resolutions and decisions of a session could only be changed or
rescinded by another session, not by any other body. The Convention had no right or
title to amend the Lahore Resolution. Surprisingly, the infringement was the deed of an
assembly of law-makers.

As the resolution passed by the Convention in supersession of the Lahore Resolution is
little known I reproduce below the first paragraph of the preamble and the opening
paragraph of the body of the text:

"Whereas the Muslims are convinced that with a view to save [sic.] Muslim India from
the domination of the Hindus and in order to afford them full scope to develop
themselves according to their genius, it is necessary to constitute a sovereign
independent State comprising Bengal and Assam in the North-East zone and the
Punjab, North-West Frontier Province, Sindh and Baluchistan in the North-West zone."

"That the zones comprising Bengal and Assam in the North-East and the Punjab, North-
West Frontier Province, Sindh and Baluchistan in the North-West of India, namely
Pakistan zones where the Muslims are in dominant majority, be constituted into a
sovereign independent State and that an unequivocal undertaking be given to
implement the establishment of Pakistan without delay."

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 129



Jawaharlal Nehru's Statement of 1946

In 1946 Jawaharlal Nehru said that after independence there will be a government of
the Hindus in India (West Punjab, class 2).

He never said this, in 1946 or any other year. Probably the textbook is referring to his
statements about the Cabinet Mission plan. What Nehru actually said was this. In
winding up the proceedings of the All India Congress Committee on 6 July 1946 in
Bombay, he declared that "so far as I can see, it is not a question of our accepting any
plan, long or short. It is only a question of our agreeing to go into the Constituent
Assembly. That is all, and nothing more than that. We will remain in the Assembly so
long as we think it is good for India, and we will come out when we think it is injuring
our cause and then offer our battle. We are not bound by a single thing except that we
have decided for the moment to go to the Constituent Assembly".

Again, On 10 July, in a press conference he amplified his speech of 6 July and said that
the Congress had agreed to go to the Constituent Assembly and to nothing else. He
added, "What we do there, we are entirely and absolutely free to determine". (Both
statements reproduced in The Indian Annual Register, 1946, Vol. 11).

Contemporary newspapers and other accounts and later studies of the period do not
contain any statement by him to the effect that after 1947 Indian will have a government
of the Hindus. It must be remembered that this lie is being told to class 2.

The NWFP Referendum

All the people of NWFP voted for Pakistan in 1946 (NWFP, class 4).

The assertion is vague. It is also grossly inaccurate whatever he means by "1946".

If the reference is to the 1945-46 elections, the facts are as follows. In the election of one
member from the province to the central legislature the Muslim League abstained on
the excuse that it was held under the joint electorate system. The Congress candidate.
Abdul Ghani Khan, received 8,159 votes; the Khaksar candidate, Muhammad Akbar
Qureshi, polled 5,386 votes. Many Muslim Leaguers must have voted for the Khaksar
candidate, because his score was out of all proportions to the actual following of his
party in the province. In the provincial elections, out of a total of 50 seats the Congress
won 30, the Muslim League 17, and the Jamat-ul-Ulema-i-Hind 2. The total Muslim
seats were 38; the Congress won 19, and the Muslim League 17. The total votes cast in
the 38 Muslim constituencies were 355,246; out of these the Muslim League received
147.940 (41.65%) and the Congress 136,201 (38.34%). 41.65% is not 100%. So much for
"all the people" of the textbook.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 130



If the reference is to the referendum held on 6-16 July 1947, the actual figures are like
this. It is important in remember that the Congress and the Red Shirts boycotted the
poll. The total number of votes cast were 292,118; those for Pakistan were 289,244. But
the total electorate on the rolls was 572,798. Thus the turn-out was only 51.00%. If the
votes cast for Pakistan are computed as the percentage of the total Muslim electorate in
the province it comes to 58.28. This again is not "all the people" of the textbook.

To tell lies is bad; to tell them to 4th class students is worse; to tell them in a textbook is
unforgivable.

Date of the Creation of Pakistan

Pakistan was created on 14 August 1947 (West Punjab, class 2). The decision to divide
the subcontinent into two parts was taken on 14 August 1947 (NWFP, class 8). Pakistan
was founded on 14 August 1947 (private, Lahore, English class 1). Pakistan was
founded by Quaid-i-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah on 14 August 1947 (private, Karachi,
English, classes 1-2). Pakistan state took its birth on 27 June 1947; the two free
Dominions of India and Pakistan were born on 19 July 1947 (private, Lahore, English,
intermediate).

The dates 27 June and 19 July are obviously the results of an attack of amnesia, and their
author, though a professor of a prestigious college, should be pitied.

The general impression, confirmed and reinforced by the official celebration of
independence, that Pakistan because free on 14 August is not correct. The Indian
Independence Bill, which was introduced in the British Parliament on 4 July and which
became law on 15 July, laid down that the two new Dominions of India and Pakistan
shall become free at the midnight of 14-15 August. The power had to be personally
transferred to the new countries by the Viceroy who was the British King's sole
representative in India. Lord Mountbatten could not be present in person in Karachi
and New Delhi at the same moment. Nor could he transfer power to India on the
morning of 15 August and then rush to Karachi, because by that time he would have
become the Governor General of the new Indian Dominion. So the only practicable
thing was for him to transfer power to Pakistan on 14 August when he was still the
Viceroy of India. But that does not mean that Pakistan gained its independence on 14
August. The Indian Independence Act did not provide for it.

Pakistan Constituent Assembly

The overwhelming majority of the Constituent Assembly wanted to make Pakistan a
ladini [irreligious] state; unfortunately, after the establishment of Pakistan the country
was full of elements and forces which did not want to see Pakistan as an Islamic society.
The greatest misfortunate was that these elements succeeded in entering the first

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 131



Constituent Assembly of the country, where they tried their best to achieve their
despicable objectives (private. Lahore, B.A.).

The first Constituent Assembly lasted from 1947 to 1954. It had 76 members: 62 from the
Muslim League, 10 from the Pakistan National Congress. 3 from the Azad Pakistan
Party, and one independent. The 62 Leaguers included M.A. Jinnah. Liaquat Ali Khan,
Abdur Rab Nishtar, I.I. Chundrigar, Raja Ghazanfar Ali Khan, Khwaja Shahabuddin,
Dr. A.M. Malik, Khwaja Nazimuddin, Dr. Mahmud Husain, Dr. I.H. Qureshi, Shoib
Qureshi, A.K. Brohi, Chaudhri Muhammad Ali, and Khan Abdul Qayyum Khan. Most
of these were old companions of the Quaid-i-Azam and leaders of the Pakistan
movement. In March 1949 the Assembly passed the Objectives Resolution. In December
1952 it published the Basic Principles Committee Report. The 1956 constitution, though
made by the second Constituent Assembly, was largely based on these two documents,
and even the Jamaat-i-Islami welcomed it and called it an Islamic constitution.

What the textbook has done is to paint in the blackest colors all the founding fathers of
Pakistan, called them enemies of Islam, ascribed "despicable objectives" to them, and
characterized their presence in the Constituent Assembly as "the greatest misfortune"
for Pakistan — all this to truckle to a ruling General, Ziaul Huq. And this libel is being
fed to the B.A. classes.

The 1956 Constitution

It had still not become operative when it was abrogated (NWFP, class 5). It never came
into operation and General Ayub Khan took over the government (Sindh, class 5). It
had just become operative when differences arose among the political parties of the
country. At this juncture, in October 1958, Ayub imposed martial law and saved the
administration from disorder (Federal Government, B.A.). Because of the resignation of
Chaudhri Muhammad Ali as prime minister the 1956 constitution never became
operative (private, Karachi, B.A.).

The Draft Bill of the 1956 constitution was presented to the Constituent Assembly on 9
January. The final debate took place on 29 February. The Constitution came into force
on 23 March. Chaudhri Muhammad Ali resigned on 12 September 1956, and was
succeeded by H.S. Suhrawardy (12 September 1956-11 October 1957), I.I. Chundrigar
(18 October-11 December 1957), (18 October-11 December 1957), and Sir Firoz Khan
Noon (16 December 1957-7 October 1958). General Muhammad Ayub Khan forced
President Iskander Mirza to abrogate the Constitution on 7 October 1958. Two weeks
later Ayub Khan ousted Mirza and made himself the supreme ruler of the country.
Thus the 1956 Constitution, far from never having come into operation, was the
fundamental law of the land for just over Iwo and a half years. from 23 March 1956 to 7
October 1958.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 132



General Ayub Khan's Coup

He took over power to save the administration from disorder (Federal Government,
B.A.). Because of the wrong policies and responsibilities of the self-styled political
leaders the country stood at the brink of a disaster, and the need of a strong government
was greatly felt. In these circumstances, General Muhammad Ayub Khan marhum
imposed martial law (private, Lahore. B.A.).

This is a special piece of pleading on behalf of General Ayub Khan, and by implication a
defence of all military coups. There was some disorder, democratic norms were not
being followed to the full, the Muslim League, under Khan Qayyum Khan. was
vociferous and insistent on demanding elections. There was unruly behavior in the
assemblies. People in power were not behaving with responsibility. Political waters
were ruffled. (All this has been a common feature of Pakistani political culture). But the
country certainly did not stand at the brink of a disaster. Neither Iskander Mirza nor
Ayub has any reasonable plea to enter in his defence. Ayub has himself told us in
writing that he had been contemplating a military take-over since 1954.

General Ayub's Rule

The people of Pakistan were very pleased with President Ayub. They gave him a higher
army rank (private, Lahore, English, class 3).

The poor people were never given an opportunity to show their pleasure or
displeasure. Ayub distrusted them so much that he abolished directly elected
assemblies and substituted them with "basic democracies" — a recession to the good old
British days of Lord Ripon. Ayub was promoted from Generalship to the rank of Field
Marshal by his own Cabinet winds was not only appointed by himself but contained
some Generals.

The 1962 Constitution

It had several clauses which were opposed to the sacred shariat. e.g., polygamy, divorce.
khula, and inheritance by the grandson (private. Karachi. B.A.).

My copy of the 1962 Constitution, an official publication, does not contain any mention
of these elements of "sacred shariat". These matters were dealt with in the Family Laws
Ordinance issued by Ayub Khan and later given protection by the National Assembly.
Had they been a part of the 1962 Constitution they would have lapsed with it: but they
are still a law of the land in spite of the 1973 Constitution and what came later.

The 1965 War

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 133



India, frightened of the Pakistan army and the people of Pakistan, sued for peace
(Punjab, class 4). When India was on the point of being defeated she requested the
United Nations to arrange a cease-lire (Punjab, class 5).

There is no evidence whatsoever that India was on the point of being beaten by
Pakistan or that it begged for peace or that it asked the United Nations to arrange a
cease-lire. The war ended when the Big Powers intervened.

Ayub's Transfer of Power to Yahya

In 1969 different political groups were making different demands. This silsilah of
demands assumed the proportions of disorder. As a result the President asked the
Commander-in-Chief, Yahya Khan, to look after the administrative conditions [literal
translation of meaningless Urdu] (Allama Iqbal Open University, B.A., Vol. I).

The prolonged, widespread, spontaneous, genuine and in later stages uncontrollable
anti-Ayub campaign cannot be dismissed by such vague explanations. The weaknesses
of his rule have to be enlisted and analyzed. Ayub Khan broke the Constitution by
handing over power to the army chief instead of to the Speaker of the National
Assembly. This fact finds no mention. We don't know what happened in the last Ayub-
Yahya meeting; the general impression is that the General put a pistol to the head of the
Field Marshal.

The "Yahya Constitution"

In March 1969 General Yahya Khan promulgated another constitution in the country
(private, Lahore. B.A.).

No such constitution was promulgated. He got a constitution drafted (I understand ex-
Chief Justice Cornelius was associated with the work); it was even printed by the
Government press; but it was never made public, issued or enforced.

The Break-up of Pakistan in 1971

A standard, repetitive, false, spurious and monotonous description of the break-up of
Pakistan appear in every textbook from class 5 to B.A. Long quotations are not required
here. The composite picture that emerges bears the following essential features: it was
imprudent and mischievous of the people of East Pakistan to oppose Urdu as the
national language; the Hindu population of East Pakistan was disloyal; there were
internal enemies who conspired against the country; India engineered riots in East
Pakistan through her agents: when conditions were ripe, India invaded East Pakistan
from all four sides, and the Pakistan army had to surrender, East Pakistan became
Bangladesh.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 134



This telegraphically brief list of charges against the Bengalis and the excuses in favor of
West Pakistan is a cruel travesty of facts. The tale is too long to be told in a short
commentary or even in one or two chapters. But in any balanced account of the breakup
the following factors ought to be mentioned (the list is not exhaustive):

(1) The 1947 decision to have one state covering both wings was shortsighted. It
made a mockery of federalism, and with a hostile India lying in between it made
East Pakistan indefensible. Geographical forces are permanent. Historical
necessity is transitory. And there was no historical necessity.

(2) The deep cultural differences between the two wings militated against the
making of a nation.

(3) The imposition of Urdu (a small minority language even in West Pakistan) on a
country where the majority spoke Bengali was unwise, doubly so in the light of
the Bengali peoples' passionate attachment to their own language— a perfectly n
atural sentiment (look at the Arabs, the French, and nearer home the Urdu-
speaking muhajirs).

(4) Right from August 1947 onwards the Bengalis were deprived of political power.
In ministry-forming, in constitutional arithmetic and in decision-making they
were ignored. Centralization aggravated it. Supreme power alternated between
the Governor General/President and the Prime Minister according to the ethnic
affiliation of the person, not by the authority inherent in the office (vide Ghulam
Muhammad and Khwaja Nazimuddin).

(5) East Pakistan was not given adequate funds. Far from enough was spent on its
development. Even its jute earnings were mostly expended on West Pakistan.

(6) The federal capital was located in West Pakistan, with all the benefits and
privileges flowing from the decision. This advantage was multiplied several
times when a new capital was built in Islamabad.

(7) Bengalis were given a grossly inadequate share in the civil administration of the
country. Their number in the superior services was unfairly small. A Bengali in
the inner circles of the federal secretariat was a curiosity. Nearly all important
decisions which affected East Pakistan as much as they affected West Pakistan
were taken without any Bengali participation.

(8) The Bengalis had virtually no share in the army. They had some representation
in the navy and the air force; but it is the army which overthrows governments

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 135



and rules the people. The Bengalis knew it with Ayub's ascension to power they
rued it.

(9) Geography and Bengali exclusion from the army made it clear that for their
security against foreign invasion the East Pakistanis were totally dependent on
the pleasure and attention of West Pakistan (as the 1965 war proved). Are we
really independent and free? They were bound to ask themselves. The question
came up for an immediate and imperative answer in 1971 when their "own
army" tried to conquer them. They gave the answer by claiming separate
nationhood. Secession was the reply forced out of them by West Pakistan's
ineptitude.

(10) The West Pakistani businessmen and civil servants domiciled or posted in East
Pakistan behaved with arrogance, boorishness, impertinence and shameless
audacity. They ensured that the Bengalis were made aware of their colonial
status. They forgot that one day Old bills would arrive to be paid — with blood
(again of the poor Bengali) instead of interest.

(11) In nearly twenty-five years of her existence Pakistan had failed to create a party
system which crossed over to the other wing. The Muslim League was
weakening fast and died in East Pakistan in 1954. After that every party was
either East or West Pakistani in origin, membership and local loyalty. To rule a
federation divided by a thousand miles without the instrumentality of one or
more national parties would have been beyond the wit of art Aristotle. though
not beyond the machinations of a Machiavelli. Them was no shortage of
Machiavellis in West Pakistan.

(12) Yahya Khan mishandled the situation grievously, but he was under tremendous
pressure from the army. His action in East Pakistan killed Pakistan.

(13) The Pakistan army was in no shape to light a war. Now that the Hamood-ur-
Rahman Report has been published in the United States and a summary of its
findings and recommendations has appeared in Pakistani newspapers, there
should be no embarrassment or rear in telling the truth.

(14) Indian intervention should not be made much of. Everybody expected it. India
herself gave fair notice. Even if India had not made a move, could the Pakistan
army defeat the Bengalis, capture the province, and maintain its hold in a state of
siege? And, for how long?

(15) In spite of the voting in the General Assembly of the United Nations, world
public opinion was against Pakistan. Let Europe and the Americas alone; not one

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 136



single Muslim country recalled its ambassador from New Delhi. It was a
complete breakdown of foreign policy.

(16) East Pakistan's secession was inevitable. Besides, or because of, the above factors,
West Pakistanis had created such resentment and haired among the Bengalis that
no other solution was in sight.

General Ziaul Huq's Coup

The textbook account of how and why General Zia threw out an elected government is
as simplistic, partial and misleading as the description of the 1971 events. Six
propositions are drummed into the ears of the students of all ages: (1) there was no
government-opposition agreement; (2) this led to political disorder in the country: (3)
law and order situation was becoming impossible: (4) anyway. Z.A. Bhutto was a
dictator and his government had done nothing to satisfy public aspirations; (5) the
Nizam-i-Mustafa movement was a mass movement; and (6) the anti-government
agitation reflected the determination of the Pakistani nation to have the Islamic order
implemented in the country. In these circumstances. the armed forces had no options
open to them; the coup was unavoidable and the right solution of the problem.

Each of the statements made above begs the question. Let me deal with them seriatim.

(1) Several politicians who were actors in these negotiations have published their
versions. The majority says that an agreement was reached, it was repudiated by
Asghar Khan, fresh negotiations were planned, everybody was getting ready for talks
— and then suddenly the army struck in the person of General Ziaul Huq. There is
considerable circumstantial evidence that the anti-government agitation was either
engineered by Zia or at least surreptitiously supported by him. His own statements,
given after the coup in public, repeatedly and in strong accents, are on record in which
he praised the motives, ideas and sacrifices of the so-called Nizam-i-Mustafa movement.
Later he invited all the component groups of the Pakistan National Alliance to become
his ministers; most of them accepted the offer. After Bhutto's execution he asked them
to get out of the government; all obeyed. This does not leave any doubt who was the
master and who were the willing servants. Had they been democrats protesting against
allegedly rigged elections they would not have tolerated a military dictator, not to
speak of becoming happy tools of an army junta — and this in spite of Zia's repeated
postponement of elections.

(2) Political disorder was not the result of the failure of the government-opposition
negotiations. Disorder and agitation are synonymous terms in street politics. Disorder
had appeared the moment the PNA started its movement.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 137



(3) The law and order situation never became impossible. Martial Law was imposed
at a few places. Processions were becoming unruly. Life was disturbed. Similar things
had happened in the anti-Ahmadiyya agitation of 1953: but no General had over
thrown the government. Zia's assertion that the country was at the brink of a civil war
must be taken as his excuse invented to justify his coup.

(4) It is very difficult to substantiate or corroborate the charges that Bhutto was a
dictator and that his government had done nothing for the people. He was the elected
leader of the majority party in the country and the parliament. He was the most popular
and the only charismatic figure since Jinnah. He had many weaknesses. He was an
autocrat, intolerant of criticism, suspicious of the word "credibility", over confident, at
times arrogant, and unwilling to make friends with his rivals. Some of his policies were
either wrongly conceived or badly implemented. He did much for his countrymen,
though not as much as they expected. Yet, he had the biggest popular following in the
country, and those loyal to him did not waver when he fell and died. But even if he was
not a perfect prime minister and his policies were not good, is that a sufficient ground
for the army chief to overthrow his government?

(5) The Nizam-i-Mustafa movement represented a minority of the minority of the
people. Many urban areas stayed quiet. The countryside stood silent and unaffected.
Had it been a mass movement it would have forced Zia to hold elections instead of
selling itself to him in exchange for a few temporary seats in the Cabinet.

(6) The agitation was a move against allegedly rigged elections and nothing more.
The demand for an Islamic order was an afterthought and was aimed at winning the
support of the uneducated masses who did not comprehend the finer points of the
electoral machinery but were susceptible to any slogan shouted in the name of Islam.
The agitation was not the voice of the nation. It used the nation's religious sentiment for
its own purpose.

General Zia as Ruler of Pakistan

Textbooks aimed at students from class 9 to B.A. give their verdict on General Zia's
military ode in five glowing testimonials: (1) his repeated postponement of elections
was the right decision taken for unavoidable reasons; (2) he honestly tried to enforce the
Islamic system of government as had been promised by the Quaid-i-Azam to the nation;
(3) his Islamic ordinances at last achieved the real objective of the creation of Pakistan;
(4) he was chosen by destiny to be the person who achieved the distinction of
implementing Islamic law; and (5) naturally, he deserves our thanks and
congratulations.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 138



Since Zia's death in 1988 much has been written on his dark years in Pakistani
newspapers and general books, most of it castigating him for what he did to the
country. I will limit my comments to the five gushing compliments listed above.

(1) He promised elections again and again and broke his promise each time. Heads
of state who make false promises are rejected by the people; but he knew that he was
irremovable because his hand was always on his power base (the gun), not on the pulse
of the nation (public opinion). The Quran enjoins on every Muslim to keep his word,
but the mard-i-momin preferred political expediency to the call of faith. The only
"unavoidable mason" for not holding elections was the fear that he would lose power
and probably his head to boot. Usurpers quail before accountability.

(2) [a] For him the heart of the Islamic system consisted of its penal laws, which he
enforced with unremitting rigor. Dozens of other Quranic injunctions which make for a
civilized society, a humane polity, an exploitation-free economy, and a just community
did not form a pan of his vision of Islam. This was hardly an honest effort to make
Pakistan an Islamic state.

[b] The Quaid-i-Azam had never given his promise to the nation that the country
would be not by the armed forces, that the people would live in fear by day and in
dread by night, that citizens would be sent to prison for criticizing the ruler and
whipped for shouting a slogan, that women would be beaten up by the police, that the
press would be terrorized, that books would be banned, that public opinion would be
denied expression, etc., etc. Jinnah was a democratic liberal. Even if the textbook writer
insists on burning incense to the General in power he should at least spare the Father of
the Nation such noisome slander.

(3) The real objective of the creation of Pakistan was not to take the people of the
area back to medieval notions of governance and distorted and unwarranted practices
of faith. I have covered the point in the above paragraph.

(4) If destiny chose Zia for the unique distinction of bringing Islamic laws to
Pakistan it must have been in a playful mood when it made the choice, and inebriate
enough to mix up joke with disaster.

(5) Zia deserves and receives the congratulations and thanks of the textbook writer.
Gosh! I am lost in wonder.

Jamaluddin "Afghani"

He belonged to Afghanistan (NWFP, class 5; Sindh, class 5). He was born in
Afghanistan (Sindh, class 7). Several books connect him with the idea of Pakistan, call
him a great pan-Islamist, emphasize his interest in and sympathy for the Indian

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 139



Muslims, and portray him as a radical critic of imperialism in general and the British
Empire in particular.

Modem research done in Iran and the West has exploded the myth woven by
Jamaluddin around himself about his origin. Now we know that he was an Iranian Shia,
not an Afghan Sunni, and was born in Asadabad in Iran. (See Iraj Afshar and Asghar
Mandavi (eds.), Documents inedit concernant Sayyed Jamal-al-Din Afghani, Tehran. 1963:
H. Pakdaman, Djamal-Ed-Din Assad Abadi din Afghani, Paris, 1969; and Nikki R. Keddie's
two books: An Islamic Response to Imperialism, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1968, and
Sayyidlamal al-Din "Al Afghani" A Political Biography, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1972).

If the textbooks have to mention Jamaluddin they should, if they aim at truth, tell the
following facts to the students.

First, Jamaluddin's views on India and Indian Muslims. He was in India between 1854
and 1857, again in 1869, and once again in 1880-81. During these visits he delivered
several speeches and wrote some articles; some of these were collected and published as
Maqalat-i-Jamaliyyeh from Calcutta in 1884. This is the only original and definite raced of
his views on India. In it there is no mention of pan-Islam or of any scheme to unite the
Muslims behind one leader, or in one state or grouping or commonwealth or what you
will. Even the defence of Islam usually comes in only as a part of an attack on Sayyid
Ahmad Khan. The three main themes of these writings are, advocacy of nationalism of a
linguistic or territorial variety, meaning a unity between Muslin's and Hindus of India
(who in Jamaluddin's knowledge spoke one language), and with nothing on the unity of
the Indian Muslims with foreign Muslims; emphasis on the inestimable benefits of
philosophy and modem science; and attacks, strong-worded and virulent, on Sayyid
Ahmad Khan as a hateful tool of the British.

Far from speaking of Indian Muslim unity or community of interest, at one place he
says, "There is no doubt that the unity of language is more durable for survival and
permanence in this world than unity of religion, since it does not change in a short time
in contrast to the latter." Nowhere does he address himself to Muslim affairs. In fact, he
is unable to distinguish between Muslims and non-Muslims in India. In a lecture at
Calcutta on 8 November 1882, he said, "Certainly I must be happy to see such offspring
of India, since they are the offshoots of the India that was the cradle of humanity.
Human values spread out from India to the whole world. ... These youths are also the
sons of a land which was the source of all the laws and rules of the world. If one
observes closely, one will see that the 'Code Romain', the mother of all Western codes,
was taken from the four sodas and the Shastras."

In his Paris journal, al-Urwa al-wutthqa, he wrote. "A religious bond does not exclude
national links with people of various faiths. In countries like Egypt and India Muslims
should cooperate with the non-Muslims and there ought to be good relations and

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 140



harmony in affairs of national interest between the Muslims and their co-patriots and
neighbors of different religions." His belief in Hindu-Muslim unity, not in separate
Muslim action or identity, is clearly expressed in one of his articles published in
L'Intransigeant of Paris ("Lettre sur l'Hindoustan", 24 April 1883).

He made a mean and intemperate attack on Sayyid Ahmad Khan's ideas and person in
his essay "Refutation of the Materialists". He did not criticize Sayyid Ahmad for his
educational or social or religious views, but for his pro-British and pro-imperialism
attitude. He called Sayyid Ahmad a dog and named him Nasatuda-i-Marg Khan (one
rejected or unglorified even by death). (The essay was published in two installments in
the Muallam-i-Shafiq of Hyderabad Deccan in September and October 1881).

What he preached in India was in tune with his general ideas about religion and
nationalism. He was a great believer in the cementing power of language. Even a
religious community could be stronger if it had a common language. Nationalism took
priority over religion. (Muhammad al-Makhzumi, Khatirat Jamal al-Din, Beirut. 1931;
Mehdi Hendessi, "Pages peu connues de Djamal al Din al-Afghani". Orient. no. 6 (1958):
Sati al-Husri, Mahiya al-qawmiyya? Beirut, 1959; and Rashid Rida, Tarikh al-ustad al-imam
al-Shaikh Muhammad Abduh, Cairo ,Vol.1, 1931).

His views on imperialism are riddled with contradictions. In 1878 he penned a bitter
attack on the British, which first appeared in the Misr of Alexandria, containing stinging
words and sparing nothing. In 1885, in an interview with the editor of La Correspondence
Parisienne, he employed terms like "perfidy", "cruelty" and "barbarism', for British rule.
But in the same year he suggested to Randolph Churchill, the Secretary of State for
India, a bold scheme for an alliance between the British, the Afghans, the Persians, the
Turks, the Egyptians and the Arabs, to drive the Russians out of Merv (W.S. Blunt,
Gordon in Khartoum). Ten years later he was writing to the British Government from
Constantinople, seeking British protection against the Cayman Sultan. (British archives).
The myth that Jamaluddin foresaw some kind of a Pakistan in the north-west of India
has been upheld by I.H. Qureshi, Sharif al Mujahid and Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, and
repeated by several popular writers. There is absolutely no original evidence in favor of
this oft-repeated tale. Unless new documents come to our hand, Jamaluddin can be
called the originator of the idea of Pakistan only by the wildest strength of imagination
which is obsessed with seeking the origin of Pakistan in the most unlikely places.

Abdul Halim Sharar

In 1890 he demanded that India be divided into Hindu provinces and Muslim provinces
(Federal Government. B.A.).

This demand was made in the editorial of his Urdu weekly magazine Muhazzib dated 23
August 1890. He used the word azla (singular. zila), districts, not subeh. Dr. A. S.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 141



Khurshid was the first to discover this statement by Sharar, but committed the mistake
of translating aria as provinces; yet insisting that in those days a zila meant a province, a
contention that finds no sanction in the Urdu dictionaries of that age. The error should
be corrected.

Sir Theodore Morison

His book (which is quoted but no identified) was published in 1818; he is throughout
called Marlin (Allama Iqbal Open University, B.A.).

Sir Theodore Morison (1863-1936) was Principal of the MAO College, Aligarh, 1899-
1905; Member, Viceroy's Legislative Council, 1903-04; Member, Council of India, 1906-
16; etc. etc.

The book which is being quoted is Imperial Rule in India: Being an Examination of the
Principles proper to the Government of Dependencies. which was published by
Archibald Constable from London in 1899, not 1818. It contains 147 pages.

E. S. Montagu

He is spelt as Montague, with an "e" added (private, Lahore, English, intermediate). He
is repeatedly mentioned as "Lord Montague" (private, Lahore, English, BA.).

Montagu and Montague are two different names in English, like Brown and Browne,
Austin and Austine, Savil and Savile, etc. Both the authors have never read an English
book (though one writes in it); hence the misspelling.

Montagu (1879-1924) was never raised to the peerage; to call him a Lord is to exercise
an authority which is only vested in the British monarch.

Sir Muhammad Iqbal

He took his doctorate in philosophy in England (NWFP, classes 5 and 7). He received
his higher education at the Cambridge and London Universities (private, Lahore,
English, class 3). He took a degree in Barristery in England (NWFP, class 5; Sindh, class
5; NWFP, class 7). He took his degree in law in England (private, Lahore, B.A.).

In the order in which wrong information is imparted:

(1) He took his doctorate in philosophy from the University of Munich in Germany.

(2) The University of Cambridge gave him a Certificate of Research, which is not a
degree. He never studied at the University of London.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 142



(3) To be called to the bar at an inn of court is not to earn a degree. A barrister is
neither a graduate nor the holder of any other degree.

(4) He did not take any degree in law in any country. He was called to the bar at
Lincoln's Inn in 1908, and that was that.

Chaudhri Rahmat Ali

He gave the name of Pakistan to the state proposed by Iqbal in 1930 (Punjab, class 8).
He proposed the name Pakistan for the state to be established by the Lahore Resolution
(Federal Government, English, intermediate). His Pakistan National Movement was
started under Iqbals advice (Federal Government, BA.). He was basically a man of
letters and a journalist (Federal Government. BA.). In his Now or Never he demanded
the separation of the Muslim-majority areas of India (private, Lahore, B.A.). His scheme
was rejected by the delegates to the Round Table Conference (private, Lahore, B.A.). He
left for England for his studies in 1927 (private, Lahore, BA.). He "took his Bar-at-Law"
from the Dublin University (private, Lahore. BA.). He published his article entitled
Now or Never in January 1933 (private, Lahore, B.A.). He died in Europe on 12
February 1951 (private, Lahore, B.A.). He is buried in Woking (private, Lahore. B.A.).

There is absolutely no evidence that he christened lqbals 1930 proposal as Pakistan or
gave this name to what the Lahore Resolution demanded (he invented the name in
1933, the Resolution was passed in 1940). He started his movement independently, not
under lqbals advice. He was neither a man of letters nor a journalist, but a political
thinker and pamphleteer. His 1933 proposal covered the north-west, not all Muslim-
majority areas of India. His plan was rejected by the Muslim co-optees on and witnesses
before the Joint Select Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform, not by the delegates
to the Round Table Conference. He left for England on 30 or 31 October 1930, not in
1927. He took his LL.B. degree from the University of Dublin, not his "Bar-at-Law".
Now or Never was a pamphlet, not an article. He did not die in Europe but in
Cambridge, England, and on 3 February at I PM, not 12 February. He is not buried in
Woking but in the New Market Road Cemetery in Cambridge.

For the evidence and sources of correct information sec my Rahmat Ali: A Biography,
Vanguard, Lahore, 1987.

Muhammad Ali Jinnah

He earned a degree in law in England (West Punjab, class 2: NWFP, class 7; private,
Lahore, English, BA.). He earned a superior and high degree in law in England (NWFP.
class 4: Sindh. class 4). He received his higher education in England (private, Karachi,

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 143



class 2). In August 1947 a grateful nation made him the Governor General of Pakistan
(private. Lahore. English, class 7).

Corrections:

(1) He did not take any degree in law, in England or elsewhere.

(2) The "superior and high degree in law" is a figment of the textbook's imagination.

(3) He did not receive his "higher education" in England. He was merely called to
the bar at the Lincoln' Inn in 1896. Why can't Pakistani professors understand
that to become a barrister is not to earn a degree?

(4) The grateful nation did not make him the Governor General either through
nomination or by election. He selected himself for Me office, and he was
appointed by the British King.

Liaquat Ali Khan

He was given the title of Quaid-i-Millat by the Pakistani nation (private, Karachi, class
11. He was given the titles of Quaid-i-Mina! and Shahid-i-Millat by the nation (private,
Karachi, class 2).

Both statements are incorrect. The nation did not bestow any title or honor upon him.
Some newspapers and a few Muslim Leaguers (mainly from the United Provinces)
started calling him by these honorifics.

Lord Mountbatten

He came to India as Governor General in 1946 (NWFP, class 8).

Mountbatten's appointment was announced by the British prime minister in his by-now
famous statement of 20 February 1947. The new Viceroy reached India on 22 March
1947.

C. R. Attlee

In 1947 the British prime minister was Lord Attlee (Punjab, classes 9-10). In 1945 the
Labour Patty came to power in England under Lord Attlee (NWFP, intermediate).

Clement Richard Attlee became the prime minister on 26 July 1945 and was succeeded
by Winston Churchill on 6 March 1950. Throughout these years he was plain Mr. Attlee.
He was created an Earl several years later, as most former prime ministers are.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 144



"A Punjabi"

The confederacy scheme of 1939 is the work of the Nawab of Mamdot (private, Lahore,
B.A.).

Mian Kafayet Ali wrote the book Confederacy of India and Nawab Sir Shahnawaz Khan
of Mamdot paid the expenses of its publication. Kafayet Ali used a pseudonym because
he was then employed in the secretariat of the Punjab Legislative Assembly and as such
was a government servant who was not allowed by service rules to publish what he
wrote. The Nawab of Mamdot did not write the book.

There are no Muslims in India

Bharat is the country of non-Muslims (private, Lahore, English, class 3).

I don't have exact figures available to me as I write this, but I am sure the number of
Muslims in India is larger than the total population of Pakistan; which makes India a
bigger "Muslim country" than Pakistan. I don't understand the logic or necessity of
making this statement, except to convince class 3 students that India is an enemy state.

The NWFP Misnamed

The North-West Frontier Province is called the North Western Province (private,
Lahore, English, intermediate).

The two provinces were entirely different units and are now located in two different
countries. As this mistake is not uncommon in Pakistani historical scholarship let me
spell out the development of the North-Western Provinces.

Soon after the British conquest of north India, the administrative unit of North-Western
Provinces was created on 1 June 1836 and put under a Lieutenant-Governor. Oudh was
joined to it on 15 February 1877. The province was re-named Noah-Western Provinces
of Agra and Oudh on 22 March 1902. It was again re-named the United Provinces of
Agra and Oudh (popularly just the United Provinces or U.P.) on 3 January 1921, and
put in charge of a full Governor. This arrangement lasted till 1947.

The historian should remember to note that in NWFP there is "West", but in the old U.P.
there is "Western", and that in NWFP the "Province" is in the singular while in the old
North-Western "Provinces" it is in the plural.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 145



Deoband and the Pakistan Movement

The services of Ore Dar-ul-Ulum of Deoband in the cause of the Pakistan movement are
unforgettable (private, Peshawar, B.A.).

The staff, students. associates and ulema of the Deoband school believed in, taught,
propagated and upheld a most illiberal interpretation of Islam. They fought a running
battle with the Aligarh School, university and movement. They were critical of the
Bengali modernistic trends of thought as these were expressed by the Calcutta
Muhammadan Literary Society, Nawab Abdul Latif Khan and Sayyid Ameer Ali. They
encouraged sectarianism of the worst variety, so much so that the Deobandi-trained
Muslims refused to pray behind a Barelawi imam; the Barelawis paid back the
compliment. Deoband was the first home of religious particularism and clannishness in
Indian Islam. When other schools and sects emerged they perpetuated this schismatical
tendency. The result was the snarling sectarianism which is with us till today, teaching
exclusiveness, encouraging intolerance, suppressing dissent, ridiculing non-conformity,
and using excommunication as an instrument of coercion.

In politics, the Deobandis believed in a composite Indian nationalism, sided with the
Congress as against the Muslim League, opposed separate electorates for Muslims,
founded the Jamiat-ul-Ulema-i-Hind which was loyal to the Congress, and in later years
put up a stiff resistance to the Pakistan movement. (For details sec Ziya-ul-Hasan
Faruqi, The Deoband School and the Demand for Pakistan, London and Bombay, 1963,
which is a fully documented justification of Deoband's anti-Muslim League stand).

In general, Deoband injected a conservatism of the deepest dye into Indian Islamic
thinking, in which tradition took precedence of reason, the letter vanquished the spirit,
prescription outlawed personal or collective exertion (ijtihad), theocracy took the place
of a modem democracy, narrow approach strangled liberalism, the gloss overwhelmed
the Book, classical codes of law were awarded permanent and immutable validity,
ritual was allowed to stand supreme in all practices of the faith— and fatwa were issued
generously and imperiously to enforce this brand of doctrinal parti pris. When the
stalwarts of the school migrated to Pakistan they brought with them all their pre-
conceived notions and theologian bitterness, and muddied the political waters of the
country.

The textbook says that Deoband's services to the Pakistan Movement are unforgettable.
Unforgettable indeed!

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 146



Founders of the Ideology of Pakistan

Among the founders of the ideology of Pakistan were Mawlana Mahmud-ul-Hasan and
Mawlana Maududi (Federal Government, B.A.).

Mahmud-ul-Hasan (1851-1920) is said to have been the first student to join the Dar-ul-
Ulum of Deoband in 1867, from where he graduated in 1873. Then he joined its teaching
staff, and was the Principal (succeeding Rashid Ahmad Gangolli) from 1905 till 1915. In
1920 he asked the Muslims to join the Congress civil disobedience movement; and in
the same year presided over the second annual general session of the Jamiat-ul-Ulema-
i-Hind held in Delhi, and also presided over the inaugural function of the lamia Millia
Islamia. He was a typical product of Deoband with which I have dealt in my last note.

Abul Ala Maududi (1903-80) left his school education incomplete, worked for a while
on the staff of Medina, a "nationalist" and religious journal of Bijnore. then edited the Taj
of Jubblepur, then served on the staff of al-Jamat of Delhi (the official organ of the Jamiat-
ul-Ulema-i-Hind), and in 1928 went to Hyderabad Deccan to own and edit Tarjuman-ul-
Quran. He taught theology at the Islamia College, Lahore, in 1938-39, and then moved
to Dar-ul-Islam in district Gurdaspur where he established his party, the Jammat-i-
Islami. in 1941. He fled to Pakistan in 1947 where he lived till his death.

In Hyderabad he won the goodwill of the Nizam by asserting the right of the small
Muslim minority to rule over the overwhelmingly Hindu state. He was impressed by
the rise of the Nazis and Fascists in Europe and borrowed from their writings in
commenting upon Indian politics (e.g. Tarjuman-ul-Quran, December 1934). He was not
interested in the proposition that where the Muslims were in a majority they should
have the right to form their own government. If Pakistan was going to be a state where
Western democracy prevailed, it "will be as filthy (na-Pakistan) as the other part of the
subcontinent. "Muslim nationalism is as accursed in the eyes of God as Indian
nationalism." He accused Jinnah of not knowing the rudiments of Islam and
condemned him for misguiding the Indian Muslims. Nationalism was incompatible
with Islam, (Process of Islamic Revolution). Islam forbade the practice of imitation, and the
adaptation of Western nationalism was nothing but imitation. "'Muslim nationalist' is as
contradictory a term as 'chaste prostitute'." (Nationalism and India). Accordingly, he not
only kept away from the Pakistan movement but missed no opportunity to give his
judgment against it. He called the Muslim League leaders "morally dead": they had no
right to call their movement "Islamic" (Musalman our Maujuda Siasi Kashmaksh. Vol. III),
This was before 1947.

His views and convictions about Islamic order and the state of Pakistan stand thus in
summary: Oath of allegiance to Pakistan by her civil servants. is not permissible until
the system of government becomes "fully Islamic" (Nawa-i-Waqt, 12 September 1948).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 147



The war in Kashmir is not a jihad (May 1948; quoted in M. Sarwar, Mawlana Maududi ki
Tahrik-i-Islami, Lahore, 1956, pp.331-332). Islam does not put any limit to the area of
land to be owned by an individual (Mas'ala-i-Milkiat-i-Zamin); thus no land reforms. The
idea of nationalizing the means of productions "fundamentally opposed to the Islamic
point of view" (ibid.). Liaquat Ali Khan's and Mumtaz Daultana's programme of
agrarian reforms is un-Islamic (Dawn, 7 June, 25, 28, 29 and 30 July, and 9 August 1950).
Neither the executive, nor the legislature, nor the judiciary can issue orders or enact
laws or give judgments contrary to the sunnah. Politics and administration are no
concern of the women. Mingling of men and women and co-education are evils. Islamic
constitution has four sources: the Quran, sunnah, conventions of the four righteous
caliphs, and the rulings of the great jurists. Party system is not allowed. The head of
state must be a Muslim. Only Muslims can be full citizens. No women can be elected to
the assembly. (Islamic Law and Constitution; First Principles of the Islamic State). "No doubt
the Islamic State is a totalitarian state" (Political Theory of Islam). It is prohibited in Islam
to be a member of assemblies and parliaments which are to be a member of assemblies
and parliaments which are based on the democratic principle of the modem age. It is
also prohibited to vote in elections to such bodies (Rasail-o-Masail, Vol. I).

Only men of "erudition and learning" can interpret the Quran. If a Muslim wants to
become non-Muslim he must leave the Islamic state; if he stays, he is to be tried for high
treason (interview to Freeland K. Abbot, Muslim World, Vol. XLVIII, Nm I). Polygamy is
sanctioned by the Quran as along as a husband does "justice" to all the four wives; and
justice means "justice in treatment of rights", not "equal attachment" (ibid.).

If anyone believes that these opinions make up an ideology of Pakistan which would
have been shared or approved by Jinnah and other makers of Pakistan he ought to get
his head examined.

Pakistan's National Dress

The national dress is shalwar, qamiz, or kurta, shirwani and Jinnah cap (NWFP, classes 9-
10; Sindh. classes 9-10; NWFP, intermediate). Women generally wear shalwar, qamiz and
dupatta (Sindh, classes 9-10; NWFP, intermediate).

If by national dress is meant a very special dress worn on very formal and official
functions and ceremonial occasions, then the first pan about men will pass muster. If
the everyday attire is meant, it is very misleading. Anyone who has passed through the
countryside of Sindh, the Punjab and the Punjabi-speaking Hazara area of NWFP
knows that the great majority of men wear tahmind (or tahmit) or dhoti around the lower
body and a kurta on the upper body. Ever the zamindar or the wadera uses this dress; he
wears shalwar and qamiz when he visits the city or attends a function. Shirwani is rarely
worn, and that only in the cold season. The Jinnah cap is mentioned, but not the much
more ubiquitous pagg or pagree or turban.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 148



The rural women generally wear a lhanga or lacha or tahmind, not shalwar, with a kurta,
not qamiz. In Karachi and in some towns sari is in use.

In any case, the discussion of a national dress in a textbook looks like an attempt at
regimentation.

The Urdu Language

Those textbooks which choose to touch the subject make amusing reading. Wild and
impossible claims are entered on behalf of the language. Three categories sum up the
case:

(1) Wide use. Urdu was the spoken language of the entire South Asia (NWFP, class
6). Before 1947 it was the language of the masses in the northern parts of South Asia,
and it still is (NWFP, classes 9-10). It was the spoken language of the common people of
the subcontinent (private, Lahore, English, class 3). It is the only language which, with
minor variations, is spoken and understood in the subcontinent right from Peshawar
(Pakistan) to Ras Kumari (Bharat) even today (Punjab, English, classes 9-10). It is
understood and spoken in all parts of the country (Federal Government, English,
intermediate). It was the language of the subcontinent (private, Lahore, English,
intermediate).

All these statements are dogmatic, ignorant and rash. They don't provide facts but
impetuous and reckless assumptions. Official patriotic fervor inspires the assertions.
Each claim bears witness to the vacuity of mind of the writer(s). The students may be
credulous and gullible, but to exploit this natural weakness and pile lie upon lie do not
befit a teacher.

Urdu was not the spoken language of the entire South Asia at any time. Nor was it ever
the language of the masses of north India; nor is it so at present. The common people of
the subcontinent who are reported to have had Urdu as their spoken tongue included
Madrasis, Bengalis, Mahamshtrians, Sindhis, Pathan, Baluchis and Malabaris. Even in
Pakistan it is not spoken as a rule anywhere except in places (which are few) where the
Urdu-speaking migrants have settled.

(2) Absorbing power. Urdu is such a language that it contains words from every
language [of the world]. And it is a feature of this language that when it accepts a word
foots any other language it makes it its own (Sindh, classes 9-10). Its prominent
characteristic is that it absorbs efficiently within itself words of various [other]
languages (Punjab, classes 9-10). Its syntax is such that the words of other languages
included in it do not appear alien, instead they look as if they originally belonged to it
(Punjab, English, classes 9-10).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 149



(1) I have not seen any Swedish, Swahili, Thai or Filipino words in Urdu.

(2) Urdu's ability to make borrowed vocabulary "its own" is not only an inane
statement but also an absurd one. Every language of the world can do it
and does it. In English alone there are words from Arabic, Persian, Hindi
and other oriental languages which it has made its own, e.g., alcohol,
divan, garble, chintz, tulip, swastika.

(3) How syntax (sentence construction) makes foreign words look native is
beyond my comprehension. Whatever the grammatical arrangement of
words (syntax), do the following words wear the local dress in Urdu:
engineer, digest, refrigerator, cricket, college, colony, township, fiat, coat,
board, committee, council. assembly, budget. boot, nib. cake (all in
common everyday use).

(3) Foundation stone of nationalist struggle. The Hindus wanted the Urdu language to
disappear from the subcontinent. But the elimination of Urdu was tantamount to the
elimination of the entire [Muslim] nation, and the Indian Muslims realized this very
well. Therefore, one of their primary objectives was the protection of Urdu; in this way,
the creation of Pakistan emerged as their demand. (private, Lahore, B.A.).

The Muslims of India felt to be vulnerable in several walks of life. In politics, they
desired safeguards, more and reserved seats in all elected bodies, separate electorates,
greater representation in the public services, bigger quota in all decision-making
centres, etc. In religion, they wanted freedom of practice and preaching, no music
before mosques, religious studies in schools, Islamic history in university syllabi, etc. In
culture, they demanded protection for their social customs, daily life, equal citizenship,
and Urdu as a Muslim language.

Apart from the distorting exaggeration in equating the elimination of Urdu with the
disappearance of the Muslim nation, the author's attempt to make the protection of
Urdu the foundation of the Pakistan demand makes nonsense of both history and logic.
The Bengalis and the Sindhis and the Pathan would not have cared for Urdu. The
Punjabis alone stood wills the U.P.- walas in defence of Urdu. Urdu was one of several
items on the agenda of Muslim-British and Muslim-Hindu negotiations and it figured
fairly down the list. The Muslim League passed several resolutions demanding
safeguards for Urdu, but it refrained from adopting one in favor of making it the
national language of Pakistan.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 150



Origins of Pakistani Languages

Apart from the general trend of singing the praises of Urdu, two textbooks for the
intermediate class written in English give us the benefit of their research on the history
and evolution of all the Pakistani languages. The Federal Government announces ex
cathedra that the origin of Pakistani languages "can be traced to religious topics" (Federal
Government, English, intermediate); while a professor of Arabic wants us to believe
that Punjabi, Pashto, Sindhi and Baluchi are the products of the same cultural factors
and ideologies which brought Urdu into existence (private, Lahore, English,
intermediate).

The Federal Government, as it speaks in this book, knows neither English nor any of the
Pakistani languages. "Traced to religious topics" is a meaningless jumble of words.

The professor of Arabic does not explain how Urdu took its birth from an ideology.
Urdu was born out of an unavoidable interaction between the languages (Turkish and
Persian) of the Muslim conquerors and the various tongues in use in north India.
Punjabi, to take one of his examples, is a much older language and there is much
controversy among historians and linguists about its exact origins. But there is no doubt
that Islam had nothing to do wills its genesis, nor with the rise of Balochi and Pashto.
Can he explain to which ideology does Arabic owe its first appearance? Languages
originate and evolve slowly and painfully under the pressure of several factors: history,
geography, migrations, meeting of two or more peoples, popular need, antecedents,
cultural requirements, etc.

Our textbook writers have ideology on their brain.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 151



CHAPTER 3

THE ROAD TO RUIN

Thus far the exercise of scrutinizing the history textbooks has been undertaken on two
levels: pointing out their errors, and correcting the mistakes; what may be called the
specific and distinct task. But a broader and mom general undertaking calls for
attention. The textbooks must now be viewed in a larger perspective.

If we step back and look at the cast and grain, the properties and potentialities, of these
books, as we survey a valley from tie higher slopes of a mountain. some questions of
approach, historiography, child psychology, general acceptance and wide impact lease
the mind. These misgivings may be phrased in the following interrogative terms:

1. Why is so little attention paid to the get-up of the book, and how does this affect
the mind of the student?

2. Why is the book written so atrociously, be it in Urdu or in English?

3. What signals and warnings do the contents of the book send to the nation?

4. What am the lessons to be learnt from what the book omits or passes by with a
cavalier glance?

5. On whom does the burden of responsibility fall for all these faults and failings?

6. Why has no one cared to protest against the pouring out of these vials of poison
into our educational system?

7. How does the use of the book endanger the moral and intellectual integrity of the
student?

8. In what diverse ways does the knowledge disseminated by the book act as a
leaven on the people at large?

I have tried to seek answers to these eight questions in this and the following chapters.

Get-up

The failure of the makers of the textbooks to understand child psychology results in two
defects in the reading material: get-up and style.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 152



From the minister of education to the supervisor in the Textbook Board no one realizes
that the impressible mind of the child is an empty vessel, made up of feelings and
sensitivities even more delicate than the finest crystal, into which first information and
then knowledge are to be poured in graduated quantities. This process demands that
right from the beginning the child is made to fall in love with books. Love is inspired by
beauty, whether the object is a woman or a painting or a flower or a book. If the first
book in the child's life is made up of a sheaf of off-white sheets stapled together with
the sharp ends of the pins jutting out to scratch his fingers, or glued so badly that after
one reading the binding disintegrates, he is going to hate books all his life and look at
them as ephemeral things of passing use. But if it is a finely-produced. attractive. well-
bound primer nicely printed on thick white paper and embellished with colorful
pictures, he will take to it with enthusiasm, keep it company, pour over it, treasure it
and save it. He might become a book lover for the rest of his life. That is how much the
finish of the book matters in the world of school education. But such a simple thought
eludes the mind of the minister of education and of everyone below him in the long
order of precedence, though all of them must have children who go to school.

The paper and printing of our textbooks are of such poor quality that the cheapest
newspaper of a civilized country would blush to appear in this shape. The paper is
either "newsprint" in use among the Urdu newspapers and therefore has the same
lasting quality, or a better white paper which looks nice but folds easily and then
crumbles. We forget that the child uses (with emphasis on every dimension of the verb)
the book every day. He carries it, opens and shuts it, throws it about, lets it drop to the
floor, folds it back to the limit of the holding power of the spine, rolls the corners of the
pages, writes his name and many other things on every available space on it, even tears
it up when he throws a tantrum. To give to this young animal in human form a
Pakistani textbook is to reduce its life to one week. I have in my possession four
textbooks on social studies in Urdu produced by the West Pakistan Textbook Board in
the 1960s which fell apart during my first reading of them. I wonder if every parent had
it bound at extra expense to his pocket, or bought ten copies to last the academic year,
or beat up the child at regular intervals to teach him how to preserve the unpreservable.
But that is only one part of the cheerless tale. Maybe the parent could afford repeated
purchases or new bindings, or got used to the painful but unavoidable task of
belaboring the loved one, or made the child study separate pages rather than the book
in one piece, or just did not care. What is more important, and is big with graver
consequences, is the thinking of the child about the book. Instead of looking at it as a
repository of knowledge, a new world of information to be explored with wide-eyed
excitement, a superior kind of toy to be played with, and a source of pleasure, he gives
it as much importance as his parents do to the daily newspaper. He gives it neither
respect nor love. Habits and attitudes formed in childhood often become lifelong.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 153



Briefly, this disappointment of the child with the textbook leads to the following results.
First, as there is no love of books there is no love of reading. He may pass his
examinations without difficulty and then enter a profession or become a civil servant,
but he will never read a book for the sake of pleasure. He will die as an uneducated
man.

Secondly, as he is not used to reading, he will be a bad parent. How can he instill in his
child a love to which he himself is a stranger? Thus one ignorant generation will
succeed another ignorant generation, and in 20 years the men and women with degrees
will not be the educated part of the nation.

Thirdly, in his own profession be will always remain blinkered, not even reading what
his duties and requirements demand. If a civil servant, he will know nothing of the
problems of the country beyond what his office files and administrative reports contain.
If a lawyer, he will be a narrow-minded legal expert with no knowledge of the outside
world; elevated to the bench, he will carry his light luggage with him. If a college or
university teacher, he will read the minimum number of books without which he
cannot lecture on his subject. but remain unaware of any other discipline. however
closely related to his own.

Fourthly, as he is not fond of reading he does not need a library; hence the absence of
public libraries in the country. (The college and university student who defaces library
books and tears out the pages and chapters he needs for examination purposes is the
developed species of the small child who used a book which fell apart during its first
reading).

In its final incarnation the badly got-up textbook appears as an uncultured nation
whose students are terrorists; whose teachers are pillars of ignorance; whose colleges
and universities are moral wildernesses; whose educated classes prefer television to
poetry, cricket to prose, and fireworks to theatre, and whose ignorance is therefore like
the twilight that neither rises nor sets, neither fades nor disappears, but slicks to them
like the tar of infamy; whose elite wears a coat of many colors and has an athletic ability
to leap aboard any passing band-wagon; whose men of letters are not too proud to
mouth base panegyrics to every tyrant who wears the raiment of authority. and whose
highest ambitions are to become members of the official academy of letters or edit
official journals or head official institutions of research and culture; whose intellectuals
are bribed accenting to their measure of eminence and degree of greed, because they
believe with Mephistopheles that "Dear friend, all theory is grey. And green the golden
tree of life" (Goethe); whose doctors of religion subscribe to the dictum raises regio eins
religio (whoever runs the country decides which church you go to): whose thinkers are
so intolerant that they look at every difference of opinion as a barricade which has to be
pulled down, and for whom consequences are more important than the truth; and
whose rich classes have not acquired a fortune. the fortune has acquired them.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 154



Style

If the outer look of the textbook annoys the child, its inner constituents repel him. Of
course, the junior students are no judge of the quality of prose they read. But they have
their own unerring yardstick of what is good and what is had; lire quality of clarity. If
they can quickly understand what the book says, they relax and want to read on. If they
cannot make out what is being said. they are tense and refuse to go further. The senior
students demand more because they deal with ideas and concepts. If things are not
explained to them in clear terms they falter and fumble and at the end of the year fail
for no fault of theirs. Even in a straight narration where an event is described or an
historical figure portrayed, they want the description to be evocative so that they can
see things happening on their mind's screen, and the portrayal to be chiseled in marble
so that the man stands forth before them in noonday light.

These are requirements of comprehension. But there is a further dimension of style
which makes the printed page a piece of literature. Of all the disciplines history alone
can become literature, partly because of its descriptive content and partly because of its
appeal to the heart.

The best book on economics or geography can never attain the sublimity of literature,
because these subjects touch the mind not the heart. History is closer to our life and to
what we hold dear. It tells of our origins, our past, the strange twists and turns which
have brought us to where we stand today, the quirks of fortune, the pranks of chance,
the play of accident, the fortuity of destiny, the role of heroes in the story of mankind,
the mistakes some of our forefathers made and the good luck which saved the others
from falling into the pit of disaster, and so many other things. Man has a natural interest
in his journey through time. History takes hint by the hand and shows hint the
landmarks of his past. How good a guide history is in unfolding the mysteries of his
existence depends on the historian.

In all civilized countries history is the most widely read subject, next to literature. Even
people of ordinary education who have no pretence to teaming read general histories,
ancient and modem. national and foreign. Historical biography attracts them like a
magnet because it stuns up the history of an epoch in the individual life of one parson.
It has great personal appeal fur the reader: man calling to man, the living knowing the
dead, the present seeing the past.

One of the principal reasons for the large audience history books command in the West
is their readability. On the whole, historical works are written with an elegance rare in
other fields, as if the subject itself brings out the best in the writer. And that is how it
should be.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 155



A good historian will remember that the world is his oyster and that syllables govern
the world. He will be read if he can carry the people along with him. If he has a perfect
command of the language he can make the long sweep of events into a vivid, moving,
pulsating piece of prose. Words should come like water bubbling from a silver jar. And
each word shall take its proper place in the sequence and order of the narration, to draw
a scene, or describe the tumult of a revolution or the commotion of a riot, or emphasize
the inner significance of an event, or paint the character of a personage. The vocabulary
is large, felicitous and varied; and the words, particularly the adjectives and the
adverbs, stand at attention waiting to be summoned to duty. The sinews of the prose
are strong and supple. The story spins itself out with unimpeded ease and lulling
fluency. The fertility of phrase is such that veil by veil the mystery of events unwinds
itself. Long sentences run with a natural effortlessness, with one clause following
another in magnificent succession. The sifted purity of the prose idiom merges with the
lyrical surge of argument. Everything is clear, unambiguous, stark, meaningful. The
reach is long, the descriptive power unruffled by the change of scene, the portrayal
revealing, the analysis of motives penetrating and balanced, the impact shattering. In
sum, a quick, glinting style like a stream over rocks; limpid, rapid, revealing, flashing,
sparkling, hiding nothing, distorting nothing, making dulcet music out of history.

I wish I could say that there are just a few, very few, books on history written by
Pakistanis which are a pleasure to read and are of respectable scholarship. To mention
European and American works along with our own is a waste of breath. Historical
scholarship as such does not exist in Pakistan. and has never existed. It does not, cannot,
exist because the present generation of historians is a product of the textbooks I have
examined in this volume. It has not existed in the past, because some of these books
were written by our senior historians, and this fact alone suffices to uphold my
contention.

I am talking about style, and that is where the textbooks provide an unchallengeable
proof of abject failure. If a historian writes badly, well, no one will read him, and his
book will rest on library shelves gathering dust and inviting vermin — a deserving end
to an ignominious act. But if the same historian. or another one of the same ilk, writes a
textbook which is painful to read. he inflicts a permanent and deep injury on the mind
and soul of a whole generation, and through it of all the succeeding ones. The student is
not only forced to read the book (the adult reader has no compulsion to persist with a
badly written work), but to do so every day, and further to memorize it in order to be
promoted to the next class. But success in examination gives him no respite. In the next
higher class he has to struggle with another book of exactly the same degree of
denseness in style. And so it goes on, year after year, unite the child of yesteryears is a
young lecturer eager to write the kind of book he has been reading all his academic life.
The model is copied faithfully. History (in both senses) repeats itself Evil is vouchsafed
a new lease of life. The art of writing disgustingly is perpetuated.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 156



In the first chapter I gave some examples of the low quality of English used by those
writers who chose this language as their medium of communication. I wish I were
writing in Urdu so that I could quote in the original the sentences and passages from
textbooks written in Urdu to show how often the language has been smirched and
defiled. Translation cannot tell what new heights of imbecility have been scaled.

Briefly, grammar and syntax disappear in the flood of excitement and passion. Rules of
composition are flouted. The choice of words is an exercise in apathy and bad taste.
There is no connection between the phrase used and what the writer wants to say. The
language is an opaque forest of jargon substantives. Sentences vanish disconcertingly in
a mist of subordinate clauses, verbs oscillate from singular to plural without warning,
and paragraphs end in syntactical chaos. The subject is separated from the object by two
full lines (as in German) of confusing verbosity. One has to shoulder one's way through
this flood of words. Arguments sink and swoon under the weight of verbiage. The
meaning has to be rescued by paraphrasing the text. Sense can only be discovered by
reconstructing the passage.

Why are the textbooks so badly written? Because they have to be written in some
language (words are the only means of communication, except for the deaf and dumb),
and the country has not yet found or evolved a language of its own on the national
level. Any discussion of language as medium of instruction loses itself in several blind
alleys or circular arguments. Why write in Urdu if you don't know it well enough to
express yourself in it? Because it is the "national" language, and because the
government has decided to make it the principal medium of teaching. If it is the
"national language" and the principal medium of instruction, why are professors unable
to handle it properly? There is no satisfactory answer to this. Blind alley number one.

Several years ago the government decided to give up English as the medium of
instruction for two reasons: it was not right for an independent country to teach its
children in a foreign language, especially the language of the hated imperial masters of
yesterday; and the country had a national language in Urdu which ought to be used for
the purpose.

The first reason was sound and honorable, but clearly hypocritical and illogical.
Hypocritical, because the government which took this decision not only did its own
business in English but encouraged or at least permitted the army, the commercial
classes, the higher judiciary, the universities of science, medicine, technology and
agriculture, and some other sectors of the nation to do the same. In addition, the very
people who ordered Urdu into schools and colleges lived a life which could only be
called a black or brown version of the good old colonial days. They dressed in European
clothes, spoke English with friends and colleagues and children, saw English films,
visited Britain and the United States on holidays (not the next-door Muslim neighbors),
and their wives wore their hair bobbed, tried to converse in English of some sort, and

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 157



were proud to entertain foreign English-speaking visitors or guests. All of them loved
the ways of the hated Englishman who had gone away. These two sentences can be
read in both the past and the present tenses.

It was also illogical, in theory as well as in practice. A language should not be judged by
your relationship with the people to whom it belongs. English is bad because the
Englishman spoke it and the Englishman ruled over us. Persian is good because the
Mughal spoke it and the Mughal also ruled over us. Where is the logic? English is bad
when students are taught in it at school. English is good when army officers speak it in
their messes. Is that logical? Nationalism and patriotism demand that we hate the
English language; but the national interest demands that we beg for British and
American military supplies and the national need demands that we beg for American
wheat. Strange logic! So much for the theoretical weakness of the argument.

In practice, too, material ambition clashes with patriotism and wins the day. Two
realities of Pakistani lift illustrate this. All the affluent Urdu-speaking families of
Karachi, the keepers of the linguistic and cultural conscience of the nation, the
clamorous supporters of Urdu as the national language, the very people who protested
violently when Bengali was made the second language of the country — all of them
send their children to English-medium schools and, when questioned on this behavior,
argue shamelessly that they want their children to do well in the world and they won't
do well if they go to Urdu-medium schools. Between conviction and money they have
made a choice, and are not embarrassed by what they have chosen. The non-Urdu-
speaking elite of all the provinces follows this practice. Further, students of Islam and of
Arabic and Persian languages who want a foreign degree to enhance their career go to
British and American universities, not to Tehran, Baghdad. Cairo or Istanbul. (Of
course. they are right. Let us not talk of the Pakistani universities of today. Not in
another hundred years will any university be able to give a degree comparable to that
from an obscure Western university).

An interesting thought enters the mind here. The politicians and political activists of the
Left in Pakistan think highly of their old toasters. During Ayub Khan's and General
Ziaul Huq's regimes when they found their life at risk or their freedom in jeopardy they
left the country and went abroad as exiles, refugees or asylum seekers. Where did they
go? Not to the Soviet Union or any country of the Eastern Block of those days, not to
any other Socialist or Communist country, not even to an African or Arab satellite of
Moscow. Their Socialist convictions did not run that far. They went and lived in the
United States, West Germany and Britain. Even Faiz Ahmad Faiz, the greatest
Communist intellectual and poet of the country and a Lenin Peace Prize winner,
preferred London and Beirut to Moscow for his voluntary exile. Blind alley number
two.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 158



No. The case against English on the basis of its imperial parentage and association
cannot be won. We love the hated colonial master and his ways as no other people do in
the former British Empire. The only parallel to this cultural loyalty that I can think of is
French North Africa. Some years after independence the Algerian foreign minister
attended an Arab summit conference accompanied by an Arab-speaking interpreter!
The things have not changed since then. In the photographs carried by newspapers of
anti-government rallies in Algiers in July 1992 we see women and girls with placards
written in French.

The second leg on which the argument in favor of Urdu stands (or rather is propped
up), namely, that it is the national language of the country, is also lame. Nowhere in the
world is the national language of a country the mother tongue of and in everyday use
by a mere 7.60 per cent of the nation (1881 census figure). And this percentage was
about 2 when Urdu was declared the only national language in 1948.

This oddity is a child of our history. In British India the All India Muslim League was
dominated throughout its life by a handful of leaders from the United Provinces, and its
decision making machinery was overwhelmed by this small group. The provincial
branches of the League in Baluchistan, Sindh, NWFP and the Punjab either did not exist
till just before independence or were weak and timid. The Lucknow Pact of 1916. which
put an irretrievable end to the prospects for Muslim self-rule in the Punjab and Bengal,
is one proof of the League's subservience to the Urdu-speaking U.P.-wala. In the years
immediately following the creation of Pakistan about half a million people from U.P.
migrated to Karachi, an equal number to the interior of Sindh, and a slightly smaller
group to the Punjab. (As this migration continued in diminishing numbers till the 1980s,
with the great bulk of it going to Sindh, the indigenous Sindhi is now in danger of
becoming a minority in his own province). These migrants brought in their luggage two
attitudes of mind: the right to decide things in and about Pakistan because it had been
created by the Muslim League which had been their party, and the title to impose their
own culture and language on the people of Pakistan because these were superior to
anything the natives of the country could offer. Two developments helped them on
their way to realizing these ambitions: the first prime minister was an Urdu speaker
who believed in promoting the interests of his community (his only constituency in
Pakistan) with vigor and without scruples: and the generality of the Punjabi politicians
sided with the migrants in order to achieve the twin objectives of suppressing the
smaller provinces of West Pakistan and denying equal (or any) decision-making power
to East Pakistan.

In this way, the political scene of Pakistan came to be ruled by people who either spoke
Urdu (the migrants) or were willing to embrace Urdu for reasons which are still unclear
(the Punjabis).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 159



That is how historical imbalanced, cultural ambiguities, ethnic ambitions. inferiority
complexes. misdirected patriotism, official dictation and thoughtless planning
combined to make Urdu the language of these textbooks. But practice has failed to
improve the writing of them. The change-over from English to Urdu as the main
medium of instruction has not made the professors proficient in Urdu. They write like
ill-educated people who are struggling with a foreign tongue (which in reality it is). If
the teachers show such poor knowledge of the language in which they write and teach,
they lose their reputation. But that is a vain thought. When everyone writes badly, with
what will you compare their work? Pernicious uniformity kills discernment and
judgment.

But what effect do these books have on the students? The young susceptible mind,
awake, alive and alert, is faced with studying and grasping a new subject in a language
which is unclear, confused and repetitive. The written word is obscure and offers no aid
to understanding. The spoken word of the teacher is a replica of the printed page,
because the teacher more often than not knows nothing outside the textbook. Even an
ordinary statement or an elementary idea expressed and explained in bad language
brings the student to a standstill. Sometimes he feels that he is not called upon to
understand, only to recite and repeat and memorize. To give this impression to the
sensitive impressionable child is to make a joke of education. Curiosity is snuffed out.
Desire to learn is extinguished. Rote takes the place of knowledge.

General insensitivity to this state of affairs. even the unawareness of it. may be related
to another practice rampant in the society. Almost every child, boy or girl, begins to
learn how to read the Quran at the age of 5 to 6. The skill is imparted by a private tutor
who visits the home of the child for half an hour or by a mawlavi in the mosque of the
locality where the child goes in the afternoon. Recently the government has ordered
that this art should be taught in all schools.

Now the important point about this coaching is that it is strictly confined to learning
how to read the original Arabic text without understanding a word of what is being
mud. This is called nazira, reading with the eye (nazar-sight), not with the mind. When
one comes to think about it, it is a strange proceeding. Arabic is a foreign language. To
read it means to learn how certain letters unite wills other letters to make a word and
these words combine with other words to form a sentence. It is far from easy to learn
even for an adult. But the child is made to learn it because the ritual of the faith
demands it. Not only that. The child gradually advances to ayats or verses, that is, a
combination of sentences. After that he is asked to memorize a few short surats or
chapters which come at the end of the Quran: again without knowing their meaning.
There would be no hams in telling the child what the words mean. Not much labor is
involved in it. But this is not done.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 160



The ritual continues in adult life in the form of two religious duties performed every
day. In early morning or sometimes in late afternoon most Pakistani Muslims read or
recite the Quran, without knowing the meaning of what they are mouthing and without
looking at the interlinear translation which every copy of the Quran carries. Then, five
times a day they say their prayers with regularity and devotion, but again without
understanding what they are uttering. The two fundamental duties enjoined by their
religion are performed in a state of imperceptiveness. A tragic commentary on the old
maxim that "faith is blind"!

Even those who don't pray or read the Quran make it a point to attend the Friday
congregational gathering in the mosque. The khutba delivered by the imam is in Arabic,
as of course is the prayer itself. Few understand any of the two. The same is true of the
funeral prayer, the wedding ceremony (the religious pan of it), the verses pronounced
on the occasions of the rites of death (qul and chehlum) and on death anniversaries. the
Arabic recited at the various khatmas held to please God and supplicate for his mercy
and blessings.

These things have been going on since Islam came to the subcontinent. People have not
learnt Arabic, not even as much of it a would suffice to understand what they are
reading, reciting, uttering or hearing. Nor have they taken the radical step of using
translations of the passages used in the prayers and other rituals (even the thought of
this is a heresy to the pious: thus knowledge becomes heresy).

Now let us conic back to the Urdu textbook and its young reader. The student's
difficulties with Urdu and his parents' ignorance of the Arabic text are not exact
parallels: the child knows more Urdu than the elders know Arabic. But the underlying
principle is the same. Whether it is religion or education, the external trappings are
more important than the inner understanding. Ceremonialism and routine must be
observed. The essence and the spirit and the substance are less important.

We have reached this stage of acting without understanding our lines (there is no
prompter in this play) for one simple reason. We have forgotten the basic educational
truth that a child must be educated (at least in his earlier years, preferably throughout
his academic life) in his mother tongue. But prospects for this appear to be bleak, and
the children of Pakistan are condemned to receive their schooling in bad Urdu, and to
grow up without a language which they know tolerably well, and without knowledge
which is acceptable to others, and without the ability to express what they know in a
language which is readable. Expression. knowledge and communication — the three
fundamentals of education — have been abrogated by the law of national necessity
which commands that we must have a national language. The law of universal
necessity which demands that we have a good educational system has been repealed in
the "national interest".

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 161



What crimes do we commit in the name of patriotism!

Contents

The two main channels through which the planners and authors of the textbooks
destroy the educational system are natural ignorance and contrived strategy. The first is
the result of intellectual lethargy, lack of knowledge, refusal to search for facts, failure
to distinguish between right and wrong, and an impenetrable self-complacency that
what they know is the truth. If this were pure ignorance. a kind of perverted innocence,
it could be removed by compelling them to take a cure and improve their reading. (That
a need should arise of sending the professors of a country to school for basic knowledge
appears to be a jest: but some truths do strain our credulity). But there is something
more than simple artless, stark, dull ignorance which is at work here. Had it been just
that the government might have found other professors to do the job or books by
private authors would have supplanted the prescribed texts. Neither of this has come
about.

It has not come about because ignorance has been specially sought after and then
deliberately harnessed to plough, seed and water the young mind with a planned
objective in view. The goal, it seems, is to produce a generation with the following
traits: docility, inability to ask questions. capacity to indulge in pleasurable illusions,
pride in wearing blinkers, willingness to accept guidance from above, alacrity to like
and dislike things by order, tendency to ignore gaps in ones knowledge, enjoyment of
make-believe, faith in the high value of pretences.

I am aware of the gravity of the accusation I am making. I will now substantiate the
charge, not by exploring the motives and compulsions which drive the authors of these
books (a task which can be very interesting, but may lend itself to subjective treatment:
and that would weaken my case), but by offering to the reader a list of items which the
books contain or attitudes which they adopt and disseminate and also a list of items
which the books don't mention with a malicious intent.

In this section I will consider what the books contain and preach: their positive
contribution (in the derogatory sense). In the following section I will survey what they
omit and fail to mention: their negative contribution.

The textbooks send the following messages to the students, and through them to the
nation:

I. Follow the Government in Office

The stuffing of the textbook is closely associated with the regime in power under which
it is produced and published. This intimate connection with the pillars of the State

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 162



(bureaucracy and political or military rulers) is inevitable when the book is planned by
the functionaries of the government, written and edited by teachers who are
government employees, approved by a committee in the federal ministry of education,
and issued by a board which is an official institution. Thus it is easy to understand the
nature of the prescribed book.

But what about private books brought out by commercial publishers. They, too, follow
the general pattern. Why? There are four good reasons:

1. The authors of these books are college or university teachers, and as such they
are under government control and not free to write against the official line.

2. It is the government which prepares the curriculum for classes 1-12 and the
universities for classes 13-14 (B.A.). These curricula go beyond defining the topics or
fields of study; they mark out the exact boundaries of the treatment and destine the
methods of presentation. Ideology dictates this. If a private author writes a book in
accordance with the curriculum, his work is not different from the official texts. If he
produces an independent book disregarding the prescribed instructions and telling the
truth, no school or college would allow its use. (I have already quoted chairmen of
textbook boards who have warned all concerned against buying any book not issued by
the board of that province).

3. If by a miracle a school were to prescribe a private book the entire class would
fail the examination for writing in its scripts something not found in the government
curriculum and the official book. (This is what a school teacher told me when I pointed
out to her the errors in the class 8 book which my niece was studying. If the girl said in
the examination script that the Aga Khan led the Simla Deputation, not Nawab Muhsin-
ul-Mulk, the examiner would fail her, because the Punjab Textbook Board said it was
Muhsin-ul-Mulk. The matter could not be debated). That shows the extent to which the
government's education policy proscribes true history.

4. No one writes an independent book simply because (a) he is afraid of the
government. When the rulers confuse the government with the State they consider
dissent as an act of treachery or at the lest of subversion of which they make the law
take notice. Fear makes cowards of us all. History can go and hang itself; (h) he will not
get a publisher for a book which would not sell a hundred copies. Nobody reads history
in the country except the students.

This official attitude produces such amusing oddities as the omission of the name of
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto from all books published during General Ziaul Huq's rule. That
means that the millions of students who went to school during the eleven years of his
dictatorship did not know what happened in the country between East Pakistan's
secession in 1971 and Zia' coup in 1977.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 163



What are the results of this textbook-government tieup? The following is an incomplete
list:

1. The students am misled by the distorted history they are made to read.

2. The textbooks changed when the regime changes, entailing considerable loss to
the national exchequer and much confusion to the students. But it also provides
the textbook boards an opportunity to find new authors, with all the corruption
involved in the process.

3. The government comes to look at the textbooks as art official propaganda
machinery rather than a means of education.

4. The academic community which supplies the authors for the book is corrupted
financially and intellectually, as it makes easy money and learns to write without
a conscience.

5. The students are brainwashed to accept one particular ruler, whom the book
extols, as a hero: when they are still in school and a new government comes into
power, they are given another hero whose praises must be sung. Confusion is a
feeble word to describe their state of mind.

6. The professors who write these successive paeans to the lords of Islamabad
develop the mindlessness and speed of an automation, turn back writers of
expanded press notes from being historians, and end up as morons.

7. The world laughs at us; in particular the American "experts" on whom we
depend for the formulation of our education policy and World Bank advisers
and the whole lot of donors and lenders of money who are invited by the
government to come to Pakistan and study our educational system. Being well
aware that Mrs. Thatcher is not mentioned in British school books even after her
retirement and President Mitterand's name does not occur in any French
textbook even when he is still in office, and so on, they quickly form an opinion
about the government and people of Pakistan which they do not express when
they are in our country.

2. Support Military Rule

The textbook-government nexus does not stop at mere inter-dependence. Its
implications go further. For 26 years in its 45-year history Pakistan has had
governments which were run by the military or put into office and sustained by the
army. It is not a matter o surprise, therefore, that the government-textbook connection

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 164



has developed into an armed forces-textbook bond. Whatever I have said above about
"Follow the Government in Office" applies in equal measure to the military. But there
are further implications which must be considered.

It becomes the duty of the textbook writer to bring its need of tribute to the General in
power. The result is not pleasant to read in any kind of book. In texts meant for young
students it is distressing. When submissive and pliant professors phrase the flattery in
abject terms it becomes despicable. Under Ayub Khan's reign the students were told
that the General was known for his piety and virtuous deeds, and that people loved
him for this and promoted him to the rank of Field Marshal and re-elected him as
President to mark their happiness and gratitude. Under Ziaul Huq's ride both School
and college students were taught to believe that the General was a pious, God-fearing,
kindly man who brought Islam to the country for the first time, thus fulfilling the
promise made by Jinnah during the Pakistan Movement years, and made Pakistan the
fortress of Islam, and that God Himself had chosen him for the task; the last claim puts
him firmly is a category only a little lower than that of the prophets.

Several lessons for the students are implicit in this approach of the textbooks:

1. National leadership is incompetent, maladroit. inept, undependable and
bad in every way. It is unqualified to rule the country.

2. People who elected or supported the failed politicians are unfit or
democracy.

3. The modern democratic system itself is a Western importation which finds
no sanction in Islam (but no alternative model is suggested or offered. and
the student is left breathless with frustration).

4. The armed forces have a supra-constitutional right to overthrow a civilian
government whenever they think it is not performing its task
satisfactorily, i.e., to the satisfaction o the armed forces. (And each time the
superior judiciary justifies the seizure in the name of a vague, undefined,
indefinable and borrowed from abroad "law of necessity" which it is
impossible for the students to understand. Try to propound and explain
Kelsen's theory to a schoolboy or an undergraduate and you will see
where the supreme court decisions have landed us).

5. The military has a right to rule the country for many years because the
return of the bad old politician would harm the land. (Once again, the
superior judiciary ratifies the military decision in the name of the good of
the country, and the students are left in the lurch asking questions which
nobody answers).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 165



In the process, the students are also learning a different set of lessons:

1. It is a good habit to obey the authority without challenging its locus standi. The
courage to question a given situation is not an admirable feature of character.

2. Dictatorship is a form of government which suits Pakistan better and makes it
stable and prosperous.

3. The citizens should not object to losing their rights and surrendering their wills
to the pleasure of one man who has all the power which he has' captured by
force and is determined to keep by force.

In brief, the textbooks provide no education in democracy, do not train the students for
self-rule, fail to mould them into prudent voters, do not tell them how to become good
citizens, and ensure that no civilian-political leadership would emerge from this
generation of students. The educational system is geared to the production of millions
of "educated" slaves instead of responsible citizens. It put blind obedience in the place
of civic virtue.

3. Glorify Wars

This factor flows from the two listed above. When the textbook is the mouthpiece of the
government and the government is often one of soldiers, it is inevitable that war should
win a prominent place in it. The praetorian state cannot be by its nature an advocate of
international peace. Here, too, the authors are not content with providing a brief
reference to the wars fought by the country. They spend several pages and sometimes
even a chapter or two in a short book on describing the details of fighting on certain
fronts. Apparently they think that these full accounts of warfare are more relevant to
the needs of the student and more important generally than the country's economic and
social conditions and system of administration. Moreover, the treatment is selective.
The 1948 war on Kashmir is hardly mentioned, because it was fought when a civilian
government was in power. The 1965 war with India receives special and long mention
because it came when General Ayub was the ruler. On the whole, from several of the
books the students learn more about the wars with India than about the country's
constitution, politics and economy.

What are the implications of this marked emphasis on and special attention to the topic
of war? Consider the following:

1. A tribute is paid to the armed forces, thus reinforcing the message of factor 2
("Applaud Military Rule").

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 166



2. Civilian form of government is played down, because the 1965 war was fought
when a General was in power and the 1971 conflict occurred during General
Yahya Khan's interregnum.

3. The emphasis on wars diverts the interest of the students from political problems
and prospects to international security.

4. The underlying but never clearly pronounced point is rammed home that it is
only the armed forces which can be saviors of the people, implying that civilian
governments and politicians are of no use in moments of national danger.

This strategy leaves deeper marks on the minds of the students than the textbook
writers realize. First, the students begin to believe in violence as the sole instrument of
solving international problems. The book contains little about diplomacy, negotiations
and peace-making. This glorification of wars can help in attracting recruits to the armed
forces but in little else. Secondly, the 1965 and 1971 wars are presented as victories for
Pakistan, which they were not. This creates self-complacency and false self-confidence,
which can be dangerous in minds which are still growing.

4. Hate India

Either to rationalize the glorification of wars or for some other reasons(s), the textbooks
set out to create among the students a hatred for India and the Hindus, both in the
historical context and as a part of current politics.

The most common methods adopted to achieve this end are:

1. To offer slanted descriptions of Hindu religion and culture, calling them
"unclean" and "inferior".

2. To praise Muslim rule over the Hindus for having put an end to all "bad" Hindu
religious belief and practices and thus eliminated classical Hinduism from India
(both claims being false).

3. To show that the Indian National Congress was a purely Hindu body, that it was
founded by an Englishman, and that it enjoyed the patronage of the British
Government. From this it is concluded that Indian nationalism was an artificial
British-created sentiment. This is done with a view to contrasting the alleged
false colors and loyalty of the Congress with the purity and nationalistic spirit
of the All India Muslim League (of this more later).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 167



4. To assert that the communal riots accompanying and following the partition of
1947 were initiated exclusively by the Hindus and Sikhs, and that the Muslims
were at no place and time aggressors but merely helpless victims.

5. To allot generous and undue space to a study of the wars with India.

Much can be said to demonstrate the unwisdom and wastefulness of this attempt. I will
mention only four principal points:

1. If an enemy has to be identified, why pick on India alone? Why not the Soviet
Union, which has always been hostile to Pakistan, sided with India on all international
issues involving Pakistan, and played a crucial part in breaking up Pakistan in 1971 by
entering into a mutual defence treaty with India just before the crisis? Why not
Afghanistan, which alone among the states of the world voted against Pakistan's entry
into the United Nations in 1947, and which till the Soviet invasion of 1979 hated
Pakistan and wanted to annex a part of its territory? Why not the United States, which
holds up all military supplies when Pakistan is fighting for its life and has always
treated Pakistan as a vassal? Why not Egypt, which in the 1971 war sent military
supplies to India?

2. If India is an enemy country, why does the Pakistan government encourage and
allow Pakistani sports teams and troupes of artist(e)s to tour India and permit and
welcome return visits? Why were Indian (Hindu) film stars received as honored guests
of General Ziaul Huq and lodged at the President's palace? Such friendly gestures are
never exchanged between enemy countries. British and South Africa were not enemy
countries, and yet for several years Britain banned her cricket team from playing
against South Africa on her territory or elsewhere.

3. India has a very large Muslim community as a part of its population; today it
exceeds the total population of Pakistan. This group shares its faith, its culture and its
history with the Muslims of Pakistan. Can a country with such a large Muslim
population which is closely connected with us ever be presented as an enemy country?

4. From 1947 till very recently a stream of Indian Muslims has been coming to
Pakistan to live here permanently. Once the partition riots were over there was no
danger to their lives in India, and yet the migration continued. Some of the arrivals
might have been spies. (Repeated official statements that all troubles and disorders in
Pakistan, even the sectarian riots, are engineered by a "foreign hand" and by "Indian
agents" give credence to such suspicions). In normal times, the Urdu-speaking migrants
now settled in Pakistan are free to visit their relatives living in India. There are a few
million families divided by the international frontier. A country does not allow citizens
of an enemy country to walk over the frontier and adopt its citizenship.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 168



Once again, the students are flabbergasted when they read one thing in the books and
see and experience another in life. In the classroom they learn that India is our greatest
enemy. Outside, they see Pakistanis going mad over buying tickets for a cricket match
between Pakistan and the visiting Indian cricket team, they know their parents'
addiction to Indian films which they watch every evening on their VCR, they hear of
Pakistani film actresses working in Indian films in Bombay, and every other day they
read of Mehdi Hasan, Nur Jahan, Reshman and others going to India to sing songs.

Seeing all this, the students are bound to grow up with a love-hate sentiment for India,
with a contempt for their elders who claim one thing and do another, and with the
seeds of hypocrisy sown deep in their character. They should be told also of the
necessity and desirability of peaceful neighborly relations, of the means of achieving
them, and of the obstacles standing in the way. A sane educational system does not
train students in hate. Whatever the justification for it or the compulsions of patriotism,
hatred corrupts the mind, more so if it is still tender, and retards its healthy growth.

5. Fabricate an Anti-colonial Past

With motives which will become transparent after we have looked at the scene, the
textbooks give to modem Indian history and the Muslim nationalist struggle a
complexion which even the most cunning make-up will not enable to stand a whiff of
historical reality. This fantasy is created through several measures of commission and
omission:

1. The revolt of 1857 is said to have been a "war of independence'. Some books add
the frill that it was a jihad undertaken by the Muslims alone, and later some non-
Muslims joined in.

2. The end of Muslim rule in India is fixed at 1857, without realizing that Muslim
sovereignty over the subcontinent had ceased soon after Aurungeb's death a hundred
and fifty years ago.

3. The information is withheld that from the lime of Shah Abdul Aziz onwards the
great majority of the ulema did not issue a fatwa against British rule, and that most of the
poets and intellectuals from the middle of the eighteenth century till independence
supported and admired British authority and culture.

4. The students are not told of the debt owed by Muslim renaissance to the efforts
on its behalf by the British government. The Calcutta Madrasa, the Calcutta
Muhammadan Literary Society, the All India Muhammadan Educational Conference,
all societies and associations formed by Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, the Aligarh College,
the Anjuman-i-Hamayat-i-Islam, the Nadwat-ul-Ulema and many other institutions
were obliged to British initiative, encouragement, support, funding, or aid and help.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 169



5. No mention is made of the fact that the foundation manifesto of the All India
Muslim League declared, as its aim and object, Muslim loyalty to the British
government.

6. The long history of Muslim loyally to the British in public life is omitted from all
textbooks.

7. Complete silence is observed on the large number of Muslims who joined the
British Indian Army, even during World War I when they went abroad and fought
against the Turks.

8. There is no reference to the fact that every concession or safeguard received by
the Muslims was granted by the British, not by the Congress.

9. It is concealed from the students that a large number of eminent Muslims were
not in the Muslim League mid did not participate in the Pakistan movement.
Intellectually these nonparticipants were far superior to the League leaders.

10. It is kept secret from the students that the All India Muslim League courted the
Punjab Unionist Party effusively and earnestly, and entered into a pact with it on its
(Unionist) terms.

11. It is wrongly asserted by every textbook that the All India Muslim League
boycotted the Simon Commission, forgetting that one part of it (probably the better
part) cooperated with the Commission.

12. It is declared that the Muslims of India made "tremendous" sacrifices to win their
freedom. The fact is that, apart from the brief years of 1858-60 and 1920-22, Muslims
suffered little hardship between 1857 and 1947. It is forgotten by everyone that Muslim
League's search for protection and safeguards (in the early years) and its struggle for an
independent country (in the later years) were strictly constitutional efforts, peaceful
campaigns and political fights, conducted through petitions, memoranda, requests,
discussions, elections, parliamentary debates and negotiations. The balder were fought
and ultimately won on the hustings. No Muslim League leaders languished in prisons.
No Muslin masses faced British bullets. The many people who died or suffered horribly
in 1947 were running away from their homes because their life was in danger, not
because they were fighting for the creation of Pakistan. They were casualties of
communal riots, not of anti-British warfare.

The principal motive of this large-scale falsification of modem history now emerges. As
the Congress has the popular and rightful image of an anti-British, fiercely nationalistic,
self-sacrificing movement, the Muslim League too ought to be bedizened in a similar

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 170



garb. The Muslim nationalist struggle must be presented as an equally fervent, flaming,
heroic, self-denying phenomenon. The League must be put on display as a rabidly anti-
British body. Alas! History is not on our side in this pretence. The entire nationalist
struggle in the subcontinent, Hindu and Muslim, was a constitutional fight in which
propaganda and processions and elections and debates were the chief weapons and
negotiations the ultimate arbiter. During the course of this struggle the Congress
challenged the British on a number of occasions and suffered for doing so, the Muslim
League never.

6. Give the entire Credit to Aligarh and the United Provinces

One infirmity from which every textbook suffers is its attempt to trace back to the
Aligarh movement every political, social, intellectual, religious and educational
development that took place in Muslim India. Sir Sayyid Ahmed Khan is called the
"greatest thinker of Pakistan". The Aligarh movement is said to have made the Indian
Muslims affluent. Every textbook from class 1 to class 14 has a few or several pages on
Aligarh. Some have a short or long chapter on it. This claim is not confined to the Urdu-
speaking writers living in Karachi. The Punjabis and the Pathans writing for their own
provinces show equal zeal in the matter.

It is impossible to deny the significant role played by Aligarh in our history. Every
historian is aware of and acknowledges its contribution to the Muslim renaissance. But
there is no warrant to allot Aligarh the monopoly of everything beneficial and
progressive which happened in Muslim India. Those who hold an all-encompassing
brief for Aligarh as the centre of Muslim revival and the fulcrum of the freedom
movement should answer the following questions:

1. Did Sir Sayyid Ahmad or did he not support the British in the 1857 uprising? If
he sided with the foreign masters and the hated colonialists in this "war of
independence", is it logical to call him the father of Muslim nationalism or a hero of
Pakistan?

2. Was the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College of Aligarh or was it not
established with the blessings and support of the British? Was it not run for a long time
by British principals, most of whom were appointed on official recommendations?

3. Was the Aligarh movement or was it not inspired and headed and administered
by a group of titled aristocrats who had reaped their laurels in the service of the British
or at the court of the Nizam of Hyderabad? Was it not an incorrigibly loyalist band?

4. Did Sir Sayyid Ahmad or did he not ask the Muslims to keep aloof from politics
at a time when the Indian National Congress had been established, the Indian political
age had begun, and the constitutional struggle for a place in the sun had commenced?

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 171



Was the advice prudent when Muslim patties had already been formed in Bengal, and
men like Nawab Abdul Latif Khan and Sayyid Ameer Ali had entered the political
arena?

5. Could Sayyid Ahmad Khan's radical interpretation of Islam have been acceptable
or even tolerable to the great majority of Pakistani men of religion who welcomed
General Ziaul Huq's retrogressive Islamization as a message from heaven? If Sayyid
Ahmad was the "first" or "greatest" thinker of Pakistan, why has his version of Islam
found no place in our books?

6. Did not the domination of the U.P. leaders over the All India Muslim League
produce the following results? (a) It inhibited the League from growing its roots and
gaining popularity in the rest of India, even in the Muslim-majority provinces. Leaders
of other provinces did not like to be ordered about by the U.P. masters of the party. (b)
It did not allow the League to open its branches and maintain them in good shape in
Bengal, Punjab, NWFP and other provinces, for the same reason as above. (c) It focused
all political attention on the interests and prospects and problems of the Muslims of the
minority provinces, leaving the others to fend for themselves by forming their own
political parties. (d) It produced the disastrous Lucknow concordat of 1916 which was
the ruin of the Punjabi and Bengali Muslim for all time to come.

7. Is it true or is it not that this emphasis on the role of the United Provinces
evolved into the claim that it was the only or chief source of Muslim culture in India
and later of Pakistani culture? (This point is elaborated in the following feature, number
7).

8. Is it a fact or is it not that most of the schismatical tendencies and religious
particularist movements in Indian Islam originated in the United Provinces? From
where else did the Deobandis, the Barelawis, the Ahl-i-Hadith, the Ahl-i-Quran and
other more minor sects emerge?

9. Doesn't the argument in favor of making the United Provinces the only centre of
revival and political awakening keep the students in the dark about the great deal that
was happening in other pans of India? Especially, didn't this extremely biased attitude
lead to the disenchantment of our East Pakistani co-religionists and fellow-citizens and
ultimately to the emergence of Bengladesh? Didn't this ramming of a false doctrine
down the throats of Pakistanis break Pakistan? (I pursue the matter further in the next
section on "Non-Contents"). And more recently, isn't this attitude alienating the Sindhis
and creating another crisis like that of 1971?

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 172



7. Impose a New Culture on Pakistan

Most of the textbooks, on both school and college levels, persist in preaching that the
United Provinces was the home of Pakistani culture. The clear message is that
Pakistanis should accept this culture; but nobody explains what it is, beyond the Urdu
language. In practice this culture is being imposed upon us through the very effective
means of the textbook.

This raises many problems and some issues of substantial importance?

1. The fact is that the United Provinces was the home of a decadent, brittle, pale,
nostalgic reflection of the Mughal culture that had passed away, not a developing,
strong, healthy, indigenous culture. It was owned only by the upper crust of the society;
the home-grown, common-man, bhayya, way of life was looked at contemptuously by
the "cultured" classes. The crust was hard, and did not contain much within it. This
superficially aristocratic culture was not shared by any class in the rest of Muslim India,
nor would it have been acceptable to Pakistanis unless it were imposed upon them
through state machinery.

2. The influence of the MAO College and the Aligarh University has been grossly
exaggerated. Only a handful of students from other 'provinces attended them. There
were several other educational institutions situated nearer home and producing more
graduates.

3. In religious terms, this culture was characterized by sectarianism and (excepting
Sayyid Ahntad Khan) a conservative interpretation of Islam, which made it divisive
vertically and horizontally.

4. This culture had a very strong element of loyalty to the British and, by extension,
to any master of liege lord. In this respect, but in no other, it shared the value system of
the Punjabi culture. But other cultures in India and later in Pakistan were less inclined
to call their political masters their mai bap (mother and father).

5. The political culture of the United Provinces was littered with anti-Muslim
League and anti-Pakistan movement spokesmen and organizations. and this did not
endear it to Pakistanis. It had produced the pro-Congress Deoband school, the
"nationalist" Muslim clique, the Jamiat-ul-Ulema-i-Hind and the Jamia Millia. It is true
that NWFP had its Red Shirts and the Punjab its Ahrars, both of whom opposed the
creation of Pakistan. But the triumph of the Muslin) League in 1947 weakened the
former and virtually eliminated the latter. Borrowing the U.P. political culture would
have introduced into Pakistan several elements which had no place in her public and
historical ethos.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 173



6. The principal, central and vitalizing force in the U.P. culture was its language,
Urdu. The unifying advantage of Urdu in Pakistan has been offset by four serious
developments: strangling the Punjabi language, and accelerating its disappearance
(details in the next section); obstructing the development of Baluchi as a written
language; creating great resentment in Sindh: and driving cast Pakistanis out of
Pakistan. Has the price paid been commensurate with the convenience of having a so-
called "national" language?

Three further questions trouble the mind:

1. Why did the leaders of the United Provinces run away to Pakistan in 1947,
leaving their followers unprotected and extremely vulnerable at an hour when their
need for guidance and protection was greater than ever before in history? Was this a
part of U.P. culture?

2. Why did so many people from the United Provinces migrate to Pakistan? They
formed by far the largest group of new entrants to the country. They were not refugees,
like people from East Punjab whose province had been divided. They were not turned
out of their homes, looted and hounded out like the Punjabis. Why did they choose,
without any political compulsion or hazard to their life, to travel to a new country and
settle there? They still continue to come when the opportunity arises.

3. Most importantly, why did these U.P. migrants look with unconcealed and
vitriolic contempt at the culture or cultures of the country which had welcomed them,
given them jobs, allotted them lands and property, and offered them valuable
opportunities in dude and commerce?

There is a double contradiction in this attitude. If the culture of the areas forming
Pakistan was. as it was claimed, a child of the U.P. culture, then these migrants had no
right to feel so superior, or to refuse to learn the local languages, or to talk incessantly of
their own glorious past, or to look at their countrymen as an uncouth, ill-bred and
uncultivated rabble. On the other hand. if the U.P. culture was so refined and superior
that they felt it uncomfortable to live among the boorish Sindhis and Pathans and
Punjabis. then this low culture of their adopted country could not have been a child of
the U.P. culture. In both cases, why did they forsake their homes and their high culture
for the sake of living among the riff-raff of Pakistan? No, the explanation has nothing to
do with culture. They came in search of fresh fields and pastures anew, to make money,
and to live in greater comfort than was possible back home. The recent revelations
about the way the Muhajir Qaumi Movement conducted its affairs does not speak well
of their superior culture. Few Pakistanis would like to be-seen to share it or to admit
that it is the progenitor or begetter of their own culture.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 174



8. Tell Lies

Throughout these pages I have quoted with chapter and verse several hundred
examples of fabrication of history with which our textbooks are replete. Easily verifiable
dates are given inaccurately. Distortion of facts, which are or should be known to every
educated person, litters the pages. Interpretations which offend common sense abound.
All these things can be explained, but certainly not excused, by the writer's ignorance or
prejudice.

But there are certain statements which fall in the category of plain lies, and in no other
category. Several professors of long teaching experience and high formal qualifications
say that Pakistan is not only an Islamic State but the "fortress of Islam", and shut their
eyes tight to where they live. Another professor tells the students that world languages
like French and English are retreating before the popular appeal of Urdu, and feels
proud of the sight. A professor with an M.A. degree from London and a doctorate from
Indiana (not India) asserts that before 1947 India was a part of Pakistan, and his
pleasure knows no bounds at this demolition of both history and geography in one
magisterial sentence.

These are not distortions or slants or misconstructions or exaggerations, or other venial
faults. They are untruths, invented deliberately to deceive. cheat and misguide the
students who attend school to increase their knowledge and build their character. When
they hear and memorize these lies, and later discover that they were lies, what do they
feel? They react in the following manner:

1. They teach to tell lies themselves when they find that the habit of lying is a part
of their education. Teaching from these textbooks is an excellent mode of producing
little devils with twisted minds. By the times these children have grown up to be
"responsible" citizens they are well trained in the art.

2. They begin to look at their teachers and the authors of the books as liars. They
lose all trust in the textbook, and in later adult life are liable to suspect that every book
is a collection of lies. Instead of creating in them a love of books we have ingrained in
them a revulsion from them. As these lies are taught and explained and elaborated by
the teachers, the students lose all respect for them. Instead of a guide, an oracle, a fount
of truth, the teacher becomes for them a purveyor of lies. But the school discipline and
the necessity of passing the examination force them to hide their true opinion of the
teacher. For the time being he must be obeyed out of fear. This experience makes them
hypocrites. In adult life they continue to apply the lesson learnt at school: to bow before
the boss or the party leader or the bureaucrat as an unavoidable formality, while
slicking to the belief that he is a liar.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 175



In 45 years the educational system has made every Pakistani a hypocrite and a liar. The
habit of not telling the truth has entered the mind of the student, the psyche of the
individual, and the character of the nation. The textbook has done its duty well. The
education of the people is complete.

Why do the textbooks lie? The answer to this takes us to a consideration of some
permanent traits of Pakistan character and culture.

The common Pakistani is a creature of emotions, and lives by them. Sentiment and a
compulsive expression of it at all times mark his private and public existence. Look at
his daily life. He quarrels at home, he laughs uproariously and talks at the top of his
voice among friends, he is hilarious and loud-mouthed at parties and pleasure
gatherings, he bellows at his office colleagues, he mourns and wails with abandon at
deaths and funerals, and so on. His political life is a mirror-reflection of his social life.
Look at the noisy processions, the shouts that rend the skies, the sloganeering, the street
brawls, the political debate ending in fulmination and an exchange of hot words and
scurrilous abuses. the fury of words cascading from the lips of the leader when he is
addressing a meeting, the inter-party riots, sectarian killings, political terrorism,
unseemly pandemonium in the assemblies, hurling of charges of treachery and treason
and subversion and unpatriotism at the members and leaders of the other party.

Look at our religious life. The mulla in the mosque delivers his sermon as if he is
roaring, though his words are being magnified by six loudspeakers fixed on the roof.
The leader of the religious party addresses his gathering as if he were fighting the devil
himself: the veins of his neck bulge out, the face reddens, the beard oscillates, the eyes
sparkle, the mouth foams; the audience applauds, shares the blaze of the outburst,
shouts slogans, goes wild. Look at the colleges and the universities. Teachers are self-
opinionated and bad tempered, students are rode and carry guns, lectures are
interrupted, seminars deteriorate into slanging matches, examination halls are centres
of iniquity, barefaced cheating and open corruption backed with violence.

Look at our men of letters. They quarrel and use the language of the gutter, they write
abusive literary criticism as if the author under review is a personal enemy, they issue
learned journals to lambast those who don't share their opinions, they split old and
respectable literary associations (like the Halqa-i-Arbab-i-Zauq) into factions to satisfy
their overgrown egos. And thus life goes on at a fast space, volatile, unbalanced,
unmoored, furious, ill tempered, capricious, unsafe.

Another national characteristic, which is relevant to this discussion, is self-praise. The
ordinary Pakistani thinks a great deal of himself and takes too many airs. He holds
himself in high esteem. But he does not extend the right of this indulgence to anyone
else. He is a whole man; all others are incomplete, imperfect, tainted. I have never met a
humble Pakistani.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 176



The natural result is intolerance. Views other than one's own are unwelcome,
unpalatable, not worth a consideration. Argument or logic plays no part in his life. Self-
righteousness conquers all. Even when he is found out cheating, there is no
embarrassment. He has not teams to blush. Insist that you are right and go on insisting,
and all will be well.

This description of our way of life is not mere rhetoric. It establishes a direct connection
between our daily existence and our textbooks. The circumstance works both ways, and
ends in a vicious circle. The national characteristics portrayed above are a result of the
textbooks on which people have been brought up. The textbooks are written by people
who want them to suit the temper of the nation. One produces the other. The non-
textbooks do not, cannot, show a different quality or standard. The same attitude of
mind determines the contents and style and thrust of the school books, college books,
and all popular and scholarly historical works. As every educationalist knows, the
school is the nursery of the nation. Pakistani textbooks will produce Pakistanis, not
Frenchmen. As ye sow so shall ye reap. The stories thou idlest to thine offspring shalt
one day become thine history.

Barthold Brecht once said that the past had to be bared to settle all accounts, so that
then one could proceed further. He was right. To know our past is the first step towards
understanding our present and planning our future. But Pakistanis seem to believe in
covering their past with fumes of falsehood and make-believe which no wind of reality
can blow away. Their view of history is made up of principled forgetfulness, willed
oblivion and purposeful silence. When they choose to recall their past they write as they
live: declaiming, emphasizing, canvassing, affirming, trumpeting, preaching,
haranguing. Their work resembles the speech by Lord Care on which Grattan passed
this famous judgment: "Great generosity of assertion, great thrift of argument— fury in
the temper and famine in the phrase."

Non-Contents

What the textbooks say and the way they say it, the theme of the last section, constitute
the ingredients of the information they want to pass on to the students. This is their
positive contribution to the sociology of ignorance: the kind of knowledge they are
imparting. But they add to the unenlightenment by withholding what should be told to
the students. This is their negative contribution. There is much in our history which is
not to be found in our textbooks. I am not talking of fabrication or distortion, but of
omission. There are several matters of grave import pertaining both to the past and to
contemporary times which fail to find mention in the books. In this section I will
indicate only three major gaps, though the thoughtful reader can add some more to the
list.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 177



1 . Culture and Inferiority Complex

The double claim that the people of the United Provinces were in the forefront of the
struggle for the creation of Pakistan and that their culture is the source or foster-mother
of Pakistani culture has produced problems of identity for the indigenous population of
Pakistan. Space does not permit a full treatment of its impact on the various provinces
taken separately. I will concentrate on the Punjab as a case-study because I am more
familiar with it.

The mind of the largest province of the country has been put to total confusion by the
following factors born of the claim:

1. An inferiority complex of the severest kind has struck the Punjabi. He is told that
his own role in the freedom movement was marginal and inappreciable. For many
years he had supported the Unionist Party, which was an enemy of the Muslim League
and an obstacle in the path leading to independence. He voted for the partition only in
1946. Therefore he was a latecomer to the ranks of the patriots. He was a laggard, and
he should be made aware of it. His own culture is also inferior, and the better parts of it
are borrowed from Delhi and the United Provinces. He sided with the Urdas' in
rejecting Bengali as a national language; when the concession was made with great
reluctance, he mourned it loudly in company with them. In doing so, he made bitter
enemies of the people of East Pakistan, but he did not care.

2. By accepting Urdu in his schools, literature, journalism and everyday life he let
his own tongue be thrown on the dunghill of history. By supporting the cause of Urdu
in Sindh he alienated the Sindhis who then bracketed him with the Urda usurpers of
their province.

3. By failing to challenge the Urda claim of the superiority of the U.P. culture he
made a confession that he had no culture of his own, thus disowning his own past and
its contribution to this life.

4. In politics he was very happy to make common cause with the Urda-dominated
federal government in (a) creating the One Unit of West Pakistan, thus angering Sindh,
Baluchistan and NWFP. (b) allowing the identity of his own province to be lost, and (c)
lending support to the rest of West Pakistan in opposition to East Pakistan (the raison
chore of the One Unit scheme). By thus playing into Urda hands, he made two grievous
mistakes: he made the Bengalis look at him as their chief enemy, and, as the largest
component of the West Pakistan province, dominated the smaller partners and

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 178



alienated their sympathies. In sum, he made himself thoroughly unpopular with every
other group in the country to please the tiny 3 percent (1950s' figure) Urda population.1

5. By continuing to concentrate on producing Urdu literature, he denied the
Punjabi language a chance to revive itself, thus sending a message to the Urdas that he
was at one with them in rejecting Punjabi as a respectable language and considering
Punjabi literature a something unworthy and low.

This self-abnegation is probably unique in the history of the nations anywhere. But was
it self-abnegation? I can see no element of denial or self-sacrifice in it. The Punjabi did
what he did with pleasure, confidence, pride, almost glee. He went further than any
other Pakistani group in adopting Urdu as his everyday spoken tongue, even within his
home. There was no compulsion for the change. The Pathan student studied through
Urdu medium but spoke Pashto at home. The Sindhi went to Urdu-medium schools but
stuck to his own language in his domestic and social life. The argument that Urdu-
medium schooling results in Urdu-speaking home life is a false one. The Punjabi had
gone to Urdu-medium schools since 1855 but had not made himself Urdu-speaking. The
trend started in the 1960s under political pressure from Karachi and Islamabad and
because of the anti-Bengali feeling in which the Punjabi decided to support the Urdas.
Yet, his decision was made of his own free will and without demur.

He chose Urdu because he was convinced that his own culture was either inferior or
non-existent. The propaganda which had its beginnings with Muhammad Husain Azad
and Altaf Husain Hali and others brought to the Punjab by the British to found the
province's school system now bore fruit. A century of insidious effort had not gone
waste. But by thus flattering the Urdas the Punjabi intelligentsia ensured the demise of
their native tongue which their fathers and forefathers had spoken for over a thousand
years.

The Punjabi was happy at the thought that, by owning Urdu as his language, he added
one more weapon to his armory of domination over the rest of Pakistan. He already
enjoyed an unalterable majority in the population of the country, an overbearing
majority in the national army, and an unchallengeable majority in the civil service. With
the Urdu language in his pocket his victory was complete (though, in fact, he had put
himself in the pocket of the Urdas; but preferred to shut his eyes to this reality). Now he
also became the dominant linguistic and cultural group in the land. Did he realize that
his victory was engineered by people who looked at him with overt and deep contempt
and, in private conversation, called his a Punjabi dhagha (ox; a symbol of stupidity)?It
did not matter. He had at last been accepted as a civilized person speaking the

1
I have borrowed this delightful new word from the columns of The Friday Times of Lahore. I use it to mean the

migrant who came from Delhi, the United Provinces, Bihar and Hyderabad, who speaks Urdu as his mother tongue.
and who views indigenous Pakistani culture with knitted brows. He has nothing in common with the other
muhajirs whose original home lay in East Punjab. Kashmir, Rajistan, Bombay, Gujerat and other areas now in India.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 179



"national" language. It did not occur to hint that he had achieved respectability by
alienating himself from his own history and culture. I suggest that he reckons the price
he has paid. even if the account is made up in Urdu.

2. Exclusion of Bengal from National Consciousness

If I were asked to pick out from all the weaknesses of the textbooks the one most
damaging and completely unforgiveable, I would unhesitatingly name the virtual
absence of Muslim Bengal. Whether these books were written before 1971 or after, they
are unanimous in giving Bengal no place at all in the history of modem Muslim India;
in a very few causes it is mentioned but put squarely on the outer periphery of the
narration, almost at the edge of nothingness.

I must first offer to the reader a bird's-eye view of the developments in Bengal in the
nineteenth and twentieth century's to make him aware of the role of the Bengali Muslim
in our recent history. Only then will he be able to recognize the monstrosity of the
injustice done by the textbook writers.

The religious reformers of Bengal of the nineteenth century were actively engaged in
anti-British activity on the one hand and in trying to establish an Islamic state on the
other, the only exception being Mawlawi Karamat Ali who was a pure reformist. They
might have been inspired by the Wahabi thinking of Arabia or by the so-called
Mujahidin movement of Sayyid Ahmad Barelawi, but they had no direct political
connection with either. They emerged from local rots and local conditions. In contrast to
the near-unanimous practice of the ulema of northern India, they declared Bengal under
British rule to be a dar-ul-herb (the house of war, a state in which the Islamic community
is being ruled and oppressed by a non-Muslim government, and in which it is the
prescribed duty of every Muslim to fight for his faith and freedom).

Haji Shariatullah (1781-1840) united the Muslim peasantry in his Faraidi or Faraizi
movement (the word is derived from the Arabic fard or Persian farz, meaning duly
enjoined by religion). Declaring British-governed Bengal as a dar-ul-harb. he said that
Friday and Id congregational prayers could not be held in the area. He called upon his
followers to launch a holy war or jihad against both the British rulers and the Hindu
landlords who were oppressing them. The seeds of political regeneration were thus
sown by him for the first time. Under his instructions, the Muslims boycotted British
courts and government schools.

Shariatullah's mission was developed and taken to its logical culmination by his son
and successor. Muinuddin Ahmad alias Dudu Mian (1819-1862). He organized his
followers into a compact, well-knit, disciplined and hierarchical system known as the
khilafat. East Bengal was divided into a number of circles, each headed by an agent who
held the members together, strengthened the organization, collected contributions and

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 180



promoted the work of proselytization. He opposed the levying of illegal taxes. By these
and other steps he aimed at creating a state within a state. In 1841 and 1842 he led two
campaigns against the Hindu landlords, both successful. Later in 1847 he was arrested
along with 63 of his followers, tried and sentenced, but acquitted on appeal by the
Nizamat Adalat of Calcutta. He was again arrested in 1857 but released in 1859; on his
release he was detained in Faridpur.

The Faridis were more revolutionary than the mujahidin of Sayyid Alunad Beralawi in
so far as they did not hide their aims and sentiments behind the veil of vague
pronouncements. They fought openly against the British on the British territory, not
against another non-Muslim community (the Sikhs) from bases in British territory.

The last of this Bengali band of fighters was Mir Nisar Ali alias Tilu Mir, who struggled
on behalf of the peasant and the lower middle classes, and died on 19 November 1831 in
a battle against the British. The principal goals of all these leaders were to effect reform
in the Muslim community, to improve their economic position by releasing them from
the slavery of the Hindu landlords, to eradicate un-Islamic practices from the Muslims
of all classes, and to drive the British out of the territory so that Muslims could live in
freedom in an independent state of their own. They failed to achieve their major aims,
but left a deep mark on the life and thinking of the lower classes of Bengali Muslims.
Their gifts to them were a spirit of revolt, readiness to suffer for a cause, realization of
the value of social and religious reforms, radicalism, and the ability to challenge the
established authority. The character molded by these influences was to influence
Bengali Muslim politics through all succeeding years.

Nawab Abdul Latif (1828-1893) founded the Muhammadan Literary Society of Calcutta
in 1863, which did a great deal of work in improving education among the Muslims and
persuading the British to give greater attention to Muslim education and provide more
facilities and opportunities to the community.

Simultaneously, Mawlawi Karamat Ali (1800-1873) of Jaunpur was concentrating on
religious reform and uplift. He spent 50 years of his life as a public religious preacher,
touring the province, especially its eastern districts, combating Hindu customs and
practices which had corrupted Muslim religious and social life, renewing the call of
pristine Islam, and arguing for orthodoxy in the interest of unity. He enjoyed great
respect and wielded tremendous influence among the Muslims. After his death his
work was carried on by his son, Mawlana Hafiz Ahmad, who died in Dacca in 1899,
and after Hafiz Ahmad by a nephew of Karamat Ali, Abdul Awwal.

Sayyid Ameer Ali (1849-1928) was a pupil of Mawlawi Karamat Ali, and was educated
in Calcutta. Called to the bar in London in 1873, he was the first Muslim barrister to
practice law at the Calcutta High Court and to teach law at the Presidency College,
Calcutta. He was a member of the Bengal Legislative Council in 1878-79 and 1881-83

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 181



and of the Imperial Legislative Council in 1884-85, the first Muslim judge of the
Calcutta High Court from 1890 to 1904, and the first Indian to be appointed member of
the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in 1909. For the political training of Indian
Muslims he founded the National Muhammadan Association in 1877, and was its
secretary for over 25 years. He presided over the All India Muhammadan Educational
Conference's first session to be held in Bengal in December 1899. In 1908 he founded the
London Muslim League and ran it single-handedly during the crucial years of the
making of the Minto-Morley reforms. He was elected president of the All India Muslim
Leagues Delhi session held in January 1910, thought he could not come to India and his
address had to be read out by someone else.

He was not only a great Indian Muslim but also a prominent activist and thinker of the
world of Islam. An ardent pan-Islamist, lie was deeply concerned with the fate of the
khilafat, of the Ottoman Empire and of Turkey. During the Balkan Wars he organized
the Red Crescent Society, and in other ways and at other limes also arranged for the aid
and succor of the suffering Muslims in several lands.

With such a busy professional and public life he yet found time to write three books on
law between 1880 and 1904, which survive to this day as university textbooks and
references, two books on Islam which the passage of a century has failed to outdate or
render irrelevant, and several articles in British learned journals which are of permanent
value. He was the first Muslim in the history of Islam to present to the Western world in
its own language an explanation and exposition of Islam, not as an apologia of a
religion but as a challenge to the Christian-Judaic civilization. He did what he could do
to remove many Western prejudices and assumptions about Islamic teachings on
women, slavery, humanism and rationalism, and to inform the Christian peoples of
Islam's contribution to philosophy, literature and the fine arts. A distinguished
interpreter of his faith to his own co-religionists and to others, he argued his credo from
a firm base of positive assurance, liberal principles and a radical impulse. He wielded a
persuasive pen and wrote fluently in the nineteenth century style of long, smooth-
running sentences which was then in vogue.

Bengal's role in Indian Muslim politics from 1906 onwards is better known to the
cognoscenti and needs no repetition here, except to draw special attention to the
following developments: it was mainly on the initiative of the Bengali leaders that the
All India Muslim League (AIML) was established in Dacca in December 1906: between
1905 and 1911 the Bengali Muslims faced the Hindu and Congress agitation and anger
because of the partition of Bengal without much political or moral support from the rest
of Muslim India; on the annulment of this partition in 1911, they face the music in
lonely suffering without any sympathy, verbal or practical, from other Muslims; in 1916
the Lucknow Pact wrenched away from them their natural right to a majority of seats in
the provincial legislature, and their protests went unheard: in the 1937 elections they
were the only Muslim group to show a respectable result in favor of the Muslim

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 182



League, when the League had not put up any candidate in Sindh and NWFP and had
won only two seats in the Punjab (one of these two was lost la the Unionists
immediately afterwards); in the 1945-46 elections they again stood with the Muslim
League more steadfastly and in greater numbers than any other Muslim province; and
between 1945 and 1947 Bengal was the only Muslim province to have a stable Muslim
League ministry.

Nor was Muslim Bengal behind the other areas in competent leadership. Its long roll of
heroes contains such eminent names as Nawab Abdul Ghani Mian (d. 1889 or 1896),
Mawlawi Abdul Karim (1863-1943), Sir Abdul Rahim (1867-1947), Mawlawi Abul
Kasem (d. 1936), Sayyid Nawab Ali Chaudhri (18631929), A.K. Fazhil Haq (1873-1962),
Sir A.K. Ghuznawi (18721939), Sir A.H. Ghuznawi (1876-1953), Nurul Amin (18971974),
Nawab Sir Sayyid Shamsul Huda (1862-1922), Mawlawi Tamizuddin Khan (1889-1963),
the extended line of the Nawabs of Dacca, and the brilliant Suhrawardis.

The Aligarh movement of the United Provinces and the political-cum-intellectual milieu
of Delhi, reinforced by the uncritical support of the Punjab, succeeded in presenting the
Muslim renaissance of the second half of the nineteenth and early years of the twentieth
centuries as a monopoly of north India and offering Urdu as the language of Muslim
India. It is true that Urdu was read and understood (and upheld as a Muslim language
during the Urdu-Hindi controversy) in northern parts of the subcontinent. But by
identifying Urdu literature with Indian Muslim literature these north Indian stalwarts
had the face to contradict honest truth. And by singing this canticle to Urdu as the only
Muslim language of India they banished from political and literary history the tongue
of the majority of Indian Muslims.

The spell which Aligarh and Delhi cast on the minds of the Muslims of northern India
blinded them to the existence of a Muslim literature in Bengal and in south India. Even
the educated classes, nay even the intellectuals and men of letters, of the north were
unaware of the Islamic and Muslim writings which had been produced and were being
produced in the Bengali language. A general impression ran current that Bengali was a
purely Hindu language, rooted in Hindu culture and written in a "non-Islamic" script.
That was enough to eject Bengali literature from the consciousness of the northern
Muslim mind. This deliberately nurtured illusion not only belied the reality but led, in
lime, to disastrous consequences for Islamic unity, Muslim nationalism and Pakistan's
integrity. But of this snore later. First let us cast a passing glance at Bengali Muslim
literature.

In the second half of the nineteenth century the two outstanding figures of Munshi
Mihrullah and Munshi Zaimiruddin instilled the spirit of Islam into Bengali Muslim
literature and influenced many writers to evolve a Muslim Bengali language and to
produce a literature which was inspired and molded by their faith. They set the bells a
ringing, but lacked the time to establish a movement to promote and popularize their

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 183



ideas or organize their followers into a group. This task was taken up by their friends
and sympathizers at the end of the century.

In 1889 this band of litterateurs began to publish a weekly called Sudhakar (Moon). In
1892 Shaikh Abdur Rahim issued his own weekly under the name of Mihir (Sun). A
little later the two magazines merged and the new amalgamated weekly was christened
Mihir-o-Sudhakar (The Sun and the Moon). Among the prominent members or what
soon came to be known as the Sudhakar group were Mawlawi Mirajuddin Abroad.
Riazuddin Ahmad Mashhadi, Munshi Shaikh Abdur Rahim, and Muhammad
Riazuddin Ahmad. Working severally and collectively, these writers produced Islamic
literature in pure Bengali, and brought the Bengali intelligentsia and readership back to
Islam.

Outside this group but sympathetic to its aims and approach were men like Sayyid
Ismail Husain Shirazi, a protagonist of Muslim revival; Muazzaniul Haq (1860-1933),
poet, novelist, biographer, translator of several books from the Persian, founder of the
monthly Lahari (Waves) in 1900, and the illustrated monthly Muslim Bharat (Muslim
India) in 1920: and Shaikh Fazio' Karim (1882-1936), most of whose works of history,
drama, poetry and fiction are based on Islamic culture and annals.

These trends were helped forward by a number of journals, e.g., Ahrnadi of Mawlawi
Abdul Hamid Khan Yusufzai, Tangail, founded in 1886; Islam Pracharak (Preacher of
Islam) of Riazuddin Ahmed, issued in 1891, suspended in 1893, and revived in 1899, an
advocate and upholder of pan-Islamism; Koh-i-Nur of S.K.M. Muhammad Raushan Ali,
Faridpur, founded in 1898; and Naha Nur (New Light) of Sayyid Imdad Ali, Calcutta,
established in 1903.

This shocking dismissal of the entire literature of the largest single and compact Muslim
community of India was not an isolated case of passing amnesia or transient bias. In
perspective it emerges as a part of an intentional campaign to keep Muslim Bengal out
of the mainstream of Muslim Indian history, culture and politics. The truth of this
observation is confirmed by the way the Aligarh movement and AIML treated the
Bengali Muslim.

The All India Muhammadan Educational Conference was established by Sir Sayyid
Ahmed Khan to attend to the educational needs, expand the educational facilities and
opportunities, and define and promote the intellectual ideals, of the Muslims of India.
Sir Sayyid was not only its founder and prime mover but also its indefatigable
permanent secretary till his death. But he had his attention fixed on north India. Though
throughout his public life he spoke in the name of the whole of Muslim India his
activities and interests contradicted this claim. His voice was hardly heard in Bengal.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 184



Prior to 1898 no Bengali Muslim had taken part in the proceedings of the Conference;
Muhammad Siddique was the first to attend the Lahore session of that year. The leaders
of the Conference were not even shamed into looking at Bengal as a part of Muslim
India when Sayyid Ameer Ali wrote in favor of a Muslim university in Aligarh in
December 1898. Some Bengali voices were raised in protest. On 31 December 1898 the
Moslem Chronicle complained in an editorial, "Far off in Bengal very little in reality
appears to be known of the teachings of the sage of Aligarh even by persons who ought
to know better." At last when the Conference held its first session in Bengal in
December 1899, Justice Shah Din (the Punjabi president of the organization in 1894 and
again in 1931) conceded "that so far this Conference has had little influence over the
Mussalmans in the Bombay and Madras Presidencies and in the Central Provinces.
Behar and Bengal proper, will hardly, I think, admit of a doubt."

However, those who ran the Conference from the United Provinces did not give car to
such "foreign" complaints. They did not even take notice of the Bengali sighs and groans
and moans.

In 1903 the constitution of the Conference reconstituted the Central Standing
Committee on the basis of the following provincial and territorial representation:
Bombay 10, Sindh 3, Bihar 5, Assam 3, Madras 10, Mysore 2, Travancore 2, United
Provinces 10, Punjab 10, Peshawar 3, Kashmir 3, Baluchistan 3, Burma 10, Hyderabad
10, Bengal 10. The Muslims of Bengal were thus given as much weight as those of
Burma or Madras or Hyderabad. The Moslem Chronicle passed strictures on the decision
on 21 November 1903, but to no purpose.

Thwarted by Aligarh's obduracy, the Muslims of Bengal organized an educational
conference of their own in Rajshahi on 2-3 April 1904. Mawlana Sayyid Shamsul Huda
presided over the proceedings, and 4,000 delegates came from all over Bengal.

In non-educational affairs, too, Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan showed no respect for Bengali
sentiment. In 1877 when Ameer Ali founded the National Muhammadan Association he
tried to persuade the Sayyid of Aligarh to cooperate with him, but he got nowhere.
Eleven years later, still unrepentant and rigid in his opinion. Sayyid Ahmad wrote to a
friend, "Ameer Ali himself came to me and had argued and insisted that I should join
the National Muhammadan Association. But I think it is not wise on the part of the
Muslims to adopt political agitation" (letter to Ghulam Niaz Khan, dated 10 December,
1888). By this time the Indian National Congress had been in existence for three years,
and the National Muhammadan Association had set up its branches in Karachi and in
several towns in the Punjab.

When the Muslim noblemen of the United Provinces made arrangements for a Muslim
deputation to see the Viceroy in October 1906 they again put the Bengalis in what they
thought was their proper place. Out of the 35 leaders who made up the deputation there

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 185



were only 5 from Bengal and one single figure from the province of Eastern Bengal and
Assam. Of the 5 "Bengalis" from Bengal. only 2 belonged to the province (Nawab
Bahadur Sayyid Amir Husain Khan and Abdur Rahim); the other 3 (Shahzada Bakhtiar
Shah of Mysore, Nasir Husain Khyal of Calcutta and Khan Bahadur Shujaat Ali Beg, the
Persian Consul General in Calcutta) were Urdu-speaking non-Bengalis domiciled in the
province. The new Muslim-majority province of Eastern Bengal and Assam spoke
through one lone voice, that of Sayyid Nawab Mi Chaudhri from Mymensingh.

In spite of this rebuff the Bengalis played a prominent part in the establishment of
AIML in Dacca in December 1906. The initiative came from Nawab Salimullah Khan of
Dacca. More than half of the delegates present at the inaugural session were from
Eastern Bengal and Assam: 38 out of a total of 68. The United Provinces sent only 16
delegates, the Punjab 5, Bihar 4, West Bengal 3, Bombay I, and Delhi I. Yet, when the
Provisional Committee of the new party was named, lo and behold! There were only 4
members from Eastern Bengal and Assam; the United Provinces had secured 23 seats.
In addition, both the joint secretaries were from the United Provinces: Nawab Muhsin-
ul-Mulk and Nawab Vigar-ul-Mulk.

Even greater humiliation was in store for the Bengalis. During the hectic years of the
Simla deputation and the emergence of AIML the most important issue which touched
the heart and life of every Bengali Muslim was the partition of Bengal. It was by no
means a mere provincial matter. The Hindu agitation against the splitting up of Bengal
and the creation of a new Muslim-majority province had the solid backing of the Indian
National Congress. This raised the controversy to an All-India level where it stirred
deep passions and led to frequent and bloody Hindu-Muslim riots.

The Bengali Muslim naturally expected the new party to take up his case and give him
full moral and political support. The right was on his side: but the Muslim League was
not. The north Indian leaders had already shown their hand when the Simla deputation
was in the making. Nawab Salimullah and Sayyid Nawab Ali Chaudhri had insisted
that the deputationists should seek an assurance from the Viceroy that the decision to
partition the province shall stand in spite of Hindu pressure. Because of the objections
raised by some non-Bengali members the demand was not incorporated in the Simla
address.

From the moment of its birth AIML demonstrated its indifference to Bengali feeling on
the partition issue. In his presidential address at its inaugural session Nawab Vicrar-ul-
Mulk made no reference to it. The Aga Khan, who was the permanent president of the
party, declared that he was opposed to the partition, thus choosing to side with the
Hindus and the Congress. Between 1906 and 1911, AIML passed 46 resolutions (not
counting those on party organizational matters). Only 2 of these were in support of the
partition, one passed at the Dacca inaugural session in 1906, and the other at the

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 186



Amritsar session of 1908; the latter was first dropped from the agenda, but restored on
the strong insistence of Nawab Ali Chaudhri who then moved it.

For these reasons the leaders of the Eastern Bengal and Assam provincial Muslim
League lost their enthusiasm for the activities and policies of AIML. It is difficult to
blame them for adopting this attitude.

With the annulment of the partition in 1911 and the consequent reconstitution of the
province of Bengal, a Bengal provincial Muslim League came into existence. It
cooperated with the parent body from 1912 onwards till the stunning blow of the
Lucknow Pact hit it in 1916. The Pact, negotiated and signed by AIML with all its wits
around it but the Bengali leaders absent, shocked the Bengalis. In April 1917 at its third
annual session the Bengal Muslim League urged the AIML Council to give further
consideration to the interests of the Muslims of Bengal as regards their percentage of
representation in the provincial legislature. There was no response to the request. Local
disillusionment led to a large number of defections from the provincial party. The
rebels then established in September 1917 a separate organization of their own, the
Central National Muhammadan Association, for the "effective protection of Muslim
interests" in the province. Sayyid Nawab Ali Chaudhri was elected its president. The
name chosen for the new party recalled Ameer Ali's revolt of 1877 against the injunction
of Sayyid Ahmad Khan. It is not known if the name was adopted to bring back to
memory the events of 40 years ago.

The formation of the Central National Muhammadan Association did not mean that the
rump of the Muslim Leaguers which now constituted the provincial League had
accepted the wrong done at Lucknow or forgotten it. On 30 January 1920 the Bengal
Muslin) League Council passed a resolution urging AIML to move the Government to
increase Muslim representation in Bengal to 50 percent in the provincial Legislative
Council. The central Muslim League took no action on this proposal. Tired of their 6-
year-old vain struggle against the Lucknow Pact and disappointed with their own
party, the Bengali Muslims now turned to the Hindus. The result was the C.R . Das-
Abdur Raisins agreement, commonly known as the Bengal Pact. (The scenario was to be
reproduced in 1971 when East Pakistanis, disgusted with the attitude of the
Government of Pakistan and the West Pakistanis. would turn to India for help).

Even then the significance and gravity of Bengali discontent failed to move AIML,
whose leaders persisted in defending the Pact in public to the chagrin of the Bengalis. In
December 1924, in his presidential address to AIML Bombay session, Sir Raza Ali, who
had been one of the negotiators of the Pact, declared, "I the other party [the Hindus] had
faithfully abided by its [Lucknow Pact's] terms ... strong and just though the complaint
of the Punjab and Bengal is. I would have had considerable hesitation for a
reconsideration of its terms". In 1926 Jinnah still described the Pact as "the finest
temporary solution of the difficulty".

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 187



The fact was that AIML, finally under the control and direction of the U.P. politicians,
was not inclined to reopen the question settled in Lucknow, simply because any
revision of the proportion of representation might lead to a decrease in the exaggerated
weightage enjoyed by the Muslims of the minority provinces. Jinnah's offer, made in
1927 at the Delhi Muslim Conference, of a joint electorate with reservation of seats fixed
in proportion to the population in the Muslim-majority provinces was not made in
response to Bengali resentment. On the contrary, it was a bargaining counter used
against the Hindus for a series of reforms including largely the interests of the Muslims
of the north and, of course, retaining the special privileges given to the Muslims of the
minority provinces under the Lucknow Pact.

Still the Bengalis went on drawing the attention of AIML to their complaint, though the
League remained lion in acting as a brick wall. On 9 July 1930 A.K. Fazul Haq, Abul
Kasem and several other leaders of the Bengal Muslim League issued a joint statement
emphasizing the need for revising the Lucknow Pact, calling it "perpetual dependency",
and stating in clear terms that they were "no longer willing to adhere to that
agreement". To mark its displeasure the provincial League did not send any delegate to
the AIML session of 1930 held in Allahabad. Nor did any representative of it attend any
meeting of the AIML Council during the consideration of and debate on the electorate
issue and the Communal Award of 1932. In the May of the same year, the Bengal
League charged the parent body with adopting an "unconstitutional procedure" in the
election of Bengali members to the AIML Council. On 10 December 1932 The Musalman
reiterated this accusation. The Bengalis were wasting their breath.

In October 1933 a section of AIML met in Howrah to hold its annual session. The Bengal
League as a body boycotted it because, among other things, AIML had not deigned to
consult it about the holding of a session in the province.

Jinnah's return to India from England and the consequent revival of the League made
no difference to the sour relationship between the central organization and the Bengal
branch. But now an important and dangerous new strategy was fashioned to bring the
Bengalis into line. Instead of ignoring them, it was now decided to deal with them
through the provincial Muslim League, but to control this League by imposing on it a
non-Bengali Urdu-speaking leadership.

The task of digging the foundations of the future state of Bangladesh had begun —
though the consummation was 35 years away.

The Bengal Muslim League did not attend the 1936 Bombay session of AIML. The
boycott carried an ominous message, because it was at this session that the League
decided to contest the coming provincial elections under the new constitution.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 188



A month later, on 21 May, Jinnah announced the personnel of a 54-member Central
Parliamentary Board. Bengal was given 8 seats on it. Neither the president nor the
secretary of the Bengal Muslim League was nominated. The appointees were: Nawab
Khwaja Habibullah of Dacca, Akram Khan, H. S. Suhrawardy, A. K. Fazlul Haq, Abdul
Momin, Abdur Rahman Siddiqui, M. A. H. Ispahani, and Mujibur Rahman. Four of the
eight were non-Bengali speaking. On 8 June Jinnah called a meeting of the Board in
Lahore. Only 2 members from Bengal attended: Siddiqui and Ispahani: both were non-
Bengalis. A still more hazardous step was taken a few days later when Jinnah appointed
these very two non-Bengalis as organizers of the new Bengal Muslim League.

In August, Jinnah appointed a 33-member Bengal Parliamentary Board. The
membership was divided among the various parties as follows: 15 for the United
Muslim Party, 7 for the New Muslim Majlis, 7 for the Bengal Muslim League, and 4 for
his own nominees. Later Faziul Haq's Krishka Proja Party joined the Board wills 15
members, but Jinnah rejected its demand for the abolition of zamindari. All the four
nominees of Jinnah were non-Bengalis: Adam Haji Daud, Faizullah Ganjee, Abdul Aziz
Ansari, and Ahmad Ispahani.

In September, the Krishka Proja Party appointed its own 26-member Parliamentary
Board, which included 6 to 15 office-bearers of the provincial Muslim League (including
its president, secretary, 3 vice-presidents, and one assistant secretary). Simultaneously,
the Bengal Muslim League Council formally dissociated itself from Jinnah's
Parliamentary Board. This made the Bengal Muslim League an ally of the Krishka Proja
Party, rather than a branch of AIML, and it now proceeded to form its own
Parliamentary Board, with Nawab Habibullah of Dacca as president, Suhrawardy and
Ispahani as joint secretaries, and Adamjee Haji Daud as treasurer. All the office-bearers
were Urdu-speaking, and 2 out of the 4 were non-Bengali traders of Calcutta.

In the 1937 elections the Bengal Muslim League won 39 seats (6 urban. 29 rural), the
Krishka Proja Party 36 (all rural), and independents 43 (2 urban, 41 rural).

On 26 October 1937, Jinnah appointed a 20-member Organizing Committee to set up a
new Bengal Muslim League. Six of these were non-Bengali businessmen (Hasan
Ispahani, Ahmad Ispahani, A. R. Siddiqui, Abdul Aziz Ansari, Mohsin Khan, and Mulla
Jan Muhammad). Another 4 were from the Urdu-speaking Dacca Nawab family
(Habibullah, Nazimuddin, Shahabuddin, and Nuruddin). Fazlul Haq was elected its
president, and Suhrawanly secretary. But on 20 December Jinnah appointed a 10-
member Working Committee of the Bengal Muslim League, with Akram Khan as
chairman, to organize the party. It included 2 non-Bengali businessmen (Ispahani and
Mohsin Khan) and 2 Dacca Nawabs (Shahbuddin and Nuruddin). Neither Suhrawardy
nor any other provincial ministers who were members of the Organizing Committee
were nominated to the Working Committee.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 189



Bengal's representation in the League's central organization was far from what its
strength and importance demand. The following figures bear this out.

The League had 3 permanent presidents: the Aga Khan, 1908-1913: the Maharaja of
Mahudabad, 1915-1919: and Jinnah, 1919-1930. None was a Bengali.

Between 1906 and 1947 the League held 38 annual sessions, each session electing its
own president. Province-wise these 38 presidents had this affiliation: Bihar 2, Bombay
12 (2 plus Jinnah for 10 times), Madras 1, NWFP 1, Punjab 6, Sindh 1. and U.P. 12. Thus
the Muslim provinces supplied 11 presidents. the minority provinces 27. There were
only 3 presidents from Bengal: Salimullah in 1912, Failul Haq in 1918, and Abdur Rahim
in 1925.

As for the venues of the sessions, only 5 of them were held in Bengal: those of 1912,
1917, 1920, 1927 and 1928. One of these was a "broken" session; the League was split
into Jinnah League and Shafi League, and the Jinnah League met in Calcutta while the
Shah League met in Lahore (1927). So in fact Bengal was chosen as a meeting place only
4 times.

With one single exception, all the secretaries, honorary secretaries and joint secretaries
of AIML were from the United Provinces. The exception was of Dr. Saifuddin Kilchlew
who held the office from 1928 to 1934.

In 1938-40, out of 23 members of the AIML Working Committee 14 came from the
Muslim-minority provinces. At this time the total Muslim population of these provinces
was 29.87% of the whole Indian Muslim population, but they were given 225 seats
(48.39%) out of 465 elected membership of the AIML Council: whereas the Muslim-
majority provinces were allotted 240 members (51.61%) against 70.13% of their
population strength.

As Dr. Harun-or-Rashid puts it: "Bengal was never given its due weight in the affairs of
the All India Muslim League and the more the League movement was heading towards
the ultimate goal the more Bengal was deprived."

The same story of neglect reproduces itself in the matters of annual sessions, office-
bearers and other elections and nominations during the later period when Bengal was
in the forefront of the Pakistan movement.

Between 1936 and 1943 AIML held eight annual sessions; none met in Bengal. The
session held in Calcutta in 1938 was a special session, not an ordinary annual session.
No session of any kind was called between 1943 and 1947.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 190



In spite of repeated requests from Bengal, no meeting of the Working Committee or of
the Council of AIML was held in Bengal between 1936 and 1947. The province's
representation among the office-bearers of the central party was nil, with the single
exception of Khan Bahadur Abdul Momin of Burdwan who was elected a joint
Secretary in 1941 for one year. From 1937 to 1947, Jinnah (Bombay) was the president,
Liaquat Ali Khan (U.P.) the general secretary, and the Raja of Mahrnudabad (U.P.) the
treasurer. They were re-elected every year at the annual session. The 23-member
Working Committee (the supreme decision-making organ of the party) had only 3
Bengalis. From 1938 onwards all of them were Urdu-speaking: Khwaja Nazimuddin
(1938-47), Akram Khan (1940-47), and Hasan Ispahani (1941-47). Even when
Suhrawardy was the only Muslim League chief minister in the subcontinent he was not
included in the Working Committee. Although Khwaja Nazimuddin was in political
wilderness in 1945 and 1946, yet he did not lose his seat in the Committee.

Bengali excommunication extended to all other committees and commissions appointed
by AIML. On 27 December 1943, Jinnah appointed a Committee of Action to deal with
organizational matters, including the direction, regulation and control of the provincial
branches. It was also given the powers to suspend, dissolve or disaffiliate any
provincial League, and further to take disciplinary action against any office-bearer of
the party. This powerful Committee with such sweeping authority consisted of Nawab
Muhammad Ismail Khan (U.P.) (chairman), Liaquat Ali Khan (U.P.), G. M. Syed
(Sindh), Sattar Ishaq Seth (Madras), Nawab Ifiikhar Husain Khan of Mamdot (Punjab),
and Qazi Muhammad Isa (Baluchistan). There was no Bengali on the panel.
Simultaneously, a Central Parliamentary Board was named, whose wide jurisdiction
covered the supervision and control of the League parliamentary parties in the
provinces: it was also to act as the "final court of appeal" in cases of the party's
nominations in by-elections and other local elections. It consisted of Liaquat Ali Khan
(U.P.), Chaudhri Khaliquzzaman (U.P.) and Husain Imam (Bihar).

In August 1944, Jinnah announced the appointment of a Planning Committee to survey
the conditions of the areas expected to form parts of Pakistan and to draw up plans for
their commercial, agricultural and industrial development. Out of its 23 members only 2
were from Bengal: Ahmad Ispahani and Khwaja Shahabuddin. Both were Urdu-
speaking; Ispahani was a non-Bengali; Shahabuddin had no knowledge of economics.

In April 1946, during the Muslim League Legislators' Convention held in Delhi, a sub-
committee was appointed to draft a resolution for the consideration of the Convention.
Its membership consisted of Nawab Ismail Khan (U.P.) (chairman), Hasan Ispahani
(Bengal). Abdul Matin Chaudhri (Assam), I. I. Chundrigar (Bombay), and Chaudhri
Ithaliquzzaman (U.P.). The only representative of Bengal was an Urdu-speaking non-
Bengali businessman of Calcutta.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 191



In October 1946, when the League decided to enter the so-called interim government
the party's nominees on the Viceroy's Executive Council were Liaquat Ali Khan (U.P.),
Sardar Abdur Rab Nishtar (NWFP), Raja Ghazanfar Ali Khan (Punjab), I. I. Chundrigar
(Bombay). and J.N. Mandal (Bengal). The only Bengali representatives of Muslim India
was a Hindu scheduled caste leader. This was the ultimate insult hurled at the Bengali
Muslims by the AU India Muslim League in its 41-year history.

Not content with suppressing the Bengalis in the political field, the north-Indian Urdu-
speaking Muslims made several attempts to dominate them in the cultural sphere. I will
give one example. An All-Bengal Urdu Association had been formed in 1926 by a group
of Urdu-speaking Bengalis and north Indian Muslims living in Bengal. Its office was in
Calcutta. It held its first provincial conference in Calcutta in July 1933, and adopted
resolutions urging the teaching of the Urdu language to Muslim students in all schools
and colleges of the province. The Conference characterized Bengali as a "Hinduized and
Sanskritined language", and declared that "in the interests of the Muslims themselves it
is necessary that they should try to have one language which cannot but be Urdu",
without which any cultural rejuvenation of the Bengali Muslims was "next to
impossible", M. Tauhid, the founder-secretary of the Association, claimed that "Bengali
was as much foreign to the Muslims of Bengal as any other foreign language". Several
letters appeared in the Star of India in 1933 and the following years protesting against
these attacks on the language and culture of the Bengali Muslims.

The Muslim Bengali also felt wronged in the commercial field. The politically aware
young section looked upon the Muslim Chamber of Commerce of Calcutta as a non-
Bengali concern. Its records were kept in the various languages of upper India, not in
Bengali, and the factories set up by the members were staffed by non-Bengali Muslims.
Resentment against the Chamber was first voiced in early 1933, and the complaints
continued till 1947.

(This bare summary of modem Muslim Bengali history and culture is based on facts
drawn from the following works, to which the doubting or curious reader may turn for
full details and documentation from original sources, especially the All India Muslim
Papers: E. Haq, Muslim Bengali Literature, Karachi, 1957; M.N. Islam, Bengali Muslim
Public Opinion as reflected in the Bengali Press, 1901-1930, Dacca, 1977; Sofia Ahmed,
Muslim Community in Bengal, 1884-1912, Dacca, 1974; Harun-or-Rashid, The
Foreshadowing of Bangladesh: Bengal Muslim League and Muslim Politics, 1936-47, Dacca,
1987; Humaira Momen, Muslim Politics in Bengal: A Study of Krishka Praja Party and the
Elections of 1937, Dacca, 1972; M. A. Rahim, The Muslim Society and Politics in Bengal,
1757-1947, Dacca, 1978; Shila Sen, Muslim Politics in Bengal, 1937-47, New Delhi, 1976;
Muinuddin Ahmad Khan, The Faraidi Movement, Karachi, 1965; A.R. Mallick, British
Policy and the Muslims in Bengal, 1757-1856, Dacca, 1961; and Benoy Gopal Ray, Religious
Movements in Modern Bengal, Viswa Bharati, 1965).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 192



All this has been virtually omitted by our textbook writers. There is an odd one-
sentence reference to Nawab Salimullah Khan in one or two books. A few mention that
the All India Muslim League was established in Dacca. One might spot Sayyid Ameer
Ali's name among the prominent Muslim figures, but only in 2 or 3 books. A. K. Fazlul
Haq makes only one appearance when he moves the Lahore Resolution in 1940. A
couple of books contain a paragraph on the Faraizi movement. That is about all that we
hear about Bengal, a province which contained the largest single gathering of Muslims
in the subcontinent, and in 1947 was to form the most populous part of Pakistan. This
deliberate neglect is the result of the standard thesis, propounded in every book, that
Aligarh was the centre of Indian Muslim culture (and later Pakistani culture), and the
United Provinces was the powerhouse which generated All Indian Muslim political
energy. The facts of Bengali history contradict this hypothesis.

Consider the following features of Bengali politics:

1. The Bengali Muslim was less loyal to the British than the U.P. or Punjabi Muslim.

2. He fought the British in three wars (without any help from outside) and suffered
much at a time when the Nawabs of Oudh were wallowing in luxury and the grandees
of Delhi were either conspiring with the Marhattas and the Rohillas or cultivating the
British and receiving pensions from them.

3. Apart from a small number of aristocrats living in Dacca or Calcutta, he had no
protectors to speak on his behalf to the British or gain for him the enjoyment of his
rights and dues. There were no ta'luqdars and nawabs and knights of proven fealty to the
British who could intercede for him or use their influence to save him from the
predacious Hindu landlord and businessman.

4. He was far poorer than the Punjabi or U.P. Muslim, but more democratic in spirit
and more ready to struggle for his rights. The character of his campaigns against the
British administration and his fight with the oppressive Hindu zamindars proves this. It
is also borne out by the fact that he let more of his leaders emerge from the middle class
than was the case in any other province. This democratic radicalism was born of his
poverty and his education. Bengal had come under British rule long before north India.
The Calcutta Madrasa had been founded in 1781 and had introduced the Muslim to
modem education.

5. As a result of the above, he was the first to enter politics and form political
groups. The earliest Muslim party in India, the Muhammadan Association, was
established by Bengali Muslims in Calcutta on 6 May 1855. This was the year when Sir
Sayyid Ahmad Khan was posted to Bijnore as Sadr Amin, a minor judicial functionary
of the East India Company. More groups followed later. Sayyid Ameer Ali, who could
see further than Sayyid Ahmad Khan, founded his National Muhammadan Association

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 193



in 1877, and when the oracle of Aligarh was preaching abstention from political activity
Ameer Ali was opening branches of his organization in Sindh and the Punjab.

6. The educated Bengali had the intellectual and religious advantage of being
familiar with Ameer Alis' writings on Islam, which presented an interpretation which
was not a whit less radical than Sir Sayyid's but was less verbose and better argued. By
writing in English Ameer Ali influenced British and European opinion more than did
the Aligarh movement. Later he founded the London Muslim League and, using it as
his platform and exerting his personal influence, he was able to persuade the British
Government to concede separate electorates to the Muslims of India in the Minto-
Morley reforms of 1909. He achieved this not only single-handedly but in the face of all
kinds of obstructions and intrigues of the U.P. leadership of the All India Muslim
League. A few years later, Mawlana Muhammad Ali and and Sayyid Wazir Hasan, both
young activists of the Muslim League from the United Provinces, humiliated the grand
old man and destroyed the London Muslim League.

7. The Bengali Muslim leadership played an important pan in the formation of the
Muslim League in 1906 and in its history during the later years. But AIML failed to
acknowledge this, by and large ignored the Bengali Leaguers, then imposed them non-
Bengali and non-Bengali speaking leaders, and at the last stage of the Pakistan
movement threw them overboard. In the 5 nominees of the League in the interim
government of 1946-47 there was no Bengali Muslim. Was there no League leader in
Bengal even of the status of the nonentities like I. I. Chundrigar. Sardar Abdur Rab
Nishtar and Raja Ghazanfar Ali Khan?

Several more features of Bengali history can be brought forth to underline the
importance of the province and the treatment meted out to it by the north Indian
Muslims. To conserve space I have listed only a few to make my point that Muslim
politics under British role was not confined to north India, as the textbooks pretend to
prove.

The consequences of omitting or belittling the role of the Bengali Muslim in the
textbooks may be summed up like this:

1. It is a deliberate and planned suppression of a significant part of the history of
India and of Pakistan, and as such it distorts our past and misguides the students.

2. Before 1971, it was criminal negligence to ignore the majority of the population of the
country: after 1971, it is even more so, because it conveys to the students the
information that East Pakistan was never a part of the country whose history they are
studying.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 194



3. The omission played a major role in alienating the Bengali Pakistanis. If Bengal
was not a part of Indian Muslim political awakening and cultural renaissance, and
acted but a minor part in the Pakistan movement, and it was an unimportant portion of
the country, then it had no place in Pakistan. This feeling. created and nursed by the
textbooks, first produced tension and conflict, then a civil war, and finally the secession
of 1971.

4. The student's mind is being prepared diligently to accept (almost expect) the
secession of East Pakistan. It can react in either of two ways: accept the break-up as a
desirable development (I know East Pakistan was disloyal and troublesome and not
really worth keeping) or treat it as a non-event (I don't know anything about East
Pakistan, so I on not interested in its secession). In other words the students are taught
to take no notice of the pre-1971 history of the country. Here the devilish intentions and
plans of the pre-1971 governments are revealed, and also of West Pakistani authors,
scholars and teachers who were accessory to the crime.

5. The secession of East Pakistan destroyed the two-nation theory on which
Pakistan was claimed and won. First, because the country based on this theory split
apart. Secondly, because the seceder sough help in its war of secession from India
which had always, before and after 1947, rejected the major premise on which the
theory stood. This aspect of the 1971 crisis is kept secret from the students.

6. The secession demonstrated the falsity of the claims made by our leaders and
ulema that Islam was the driving force behind the Pakistan movement and the
determinant of Pakistani nationalism. When the students, even the senior ones among
them are denied the opportunity to gain detailed knowledge of the event and to discuss
its implications, they begin to doubt if Islam was really the primum mobile of the
Pakistan movement. But every book insists and reiterates that Islam was the fast
premise of the syllogism of the Pakistan demand: Islam cannot co-exist with Hinduism:
therefore. Muslims must separate from India; ergo. Pakistan must be created. In the
school the student hears a lot about the syllogism, but nothing about its application to
the 1971 break-up. That is where he misses his way.

3. Desiderata of History

In a short note here I wish to draw the attention of whoever is interested in the teaching
of history and the writing of textbooks to some of the major topics which are not dealt
with at all in the teaching material, with the reasons which make their study imperative:

1. The Indian National Congress, because it is a part of our joint history, several
leading Muslims played important roles in it, Jinnah was a member of it for several
years, and the Muslim League negotiated and entered into a pact (at Lucknow) with it.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 195



Even if it is considered an enemy and nothing more, common sense demands that we
know our enemy well.

2. The Khudai Khidmatgars, because they were an important Muslim party, they
brought political awakening to the NWFP, and they rated the province for 8 out of the
10 years of provincial autonomy.

3. The Punjab Unionist Party, because it was a major party and ruled the largest
province of what was to be the post-1971 Pakistan, it supported the Pakistan demand at
the all-India level (under the Sikandar-Jinnah Pact), it was wooed by the Muslim
League which was keen to win its support, and many post-1946 Muslim Leaguers were
former Unionists.

4. The Khaksar movement, because it was popular among a portion of Punjabi
middle classes, it had some original features like simplicity, humility and discipline,
and its leader, Inayatullah Khan Mashriqi, was a thinker of some standing (though few
are aware of it).

5. The Ahrar party, because it was the mouthpiece of a strong-minded religious
sentiment, it had some support in the middle and lower middle strata of society, and it
was indigenous to the Punjab.

6. The "nationalist" or pro-Congress Muslims, because they were Muslims, they
persuaded the Congress to reject Muslim League demands and thus made a Hindu-
Muslim entente impossible, and they counted in their ranks some of the ablest men of
the modem period.

7. Historiography of India or at least of Muslim India (for senior classes), because it
helps in understanding the way history has been viewed and chronicled by various
writers in various periods.

8. Theory and philosophy of history (for classes 13-14), because without it the
meaning, significance and lessons of history cannot be grasped.

9. Economic, social, intellectual and literary history, because without a knowledge
of it the study of political history is a statement without a context. Of course, careful
planning is necessary so that parts of this history are taught at various levels according
to the age group involved.

10. Modem Islamic thought (from Shah Waliullah to the present day), because the
ideas and opinions of Shah Waliullah, Shah Abdul Aziz, Haji Shariatullah, Dudu Minn,
Sayyid Ahmad Barelawi, Titu Mir, Karamat Ali Jaunpuri, Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Ameer
Ali, Iqbal, Abul Kalam Azad, Abul Ala Maududi, Ghulam Ahmad Pervez and others

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 196



have molded the thinking and therefore the politics and culture of the last few
generations, and to communicate to the students the results (politics) without telling
them about the causes (thought) is to pass on half-baked knowledge and to refuse to
answer basic questions. The contents and scope of this topic should be varied keeping
in view the ages and classes of the students.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 197



CHAPTER 4

THE BURDEN OF RESPONSIBILITY

In the last three chapters we have been dealing with a hair-raising array of logical
fallacies, biased statements, irrational distortions. misleading affirmations, hypocritical
and self-righteous pronouncements, leaps of imagination and plain inaccuracies. The
ephemeral and dubious authority of hearsay and third-hand reports has been given
greater permanence and a spurious credibility by the hectoring authority of the written
and printed word of the (in most cases) officially prepared textbook.

The variety, outrageousness and ubiquity of the mistakes in these books raise the
question: who bears the responsibility for the contents and the quality of the matter
presented?

The Establishment

The burden of responsibility rests on the official Establishment, the authors and the
teachers, in this order.

The government machinery is in action on all levels. It makes the education policy,
creates, mans, runs and controls the Textbook Boards, orders the compilation of the
books, provides the guidelines to be followed, appoints the authors, revises. checks and
corrects the manuscripts. approves the final draft, and publishes and sells the books. All
institutions and organizations involved in the long and expensive operation function
under the control of the Federal Ministry of Education — the University Grants
Commission. the National Review Committee, the Allama Iqbal Open University, and
the Quaid-i-Azam University. The federal and provincial governments control jointly
all the universities in the country whose teachers are among the authors of these books.
The various Textbook Boards are under the administrative control of the provincial
governments, but in the matter of textbooks they receive instructions from Islamabad
and they are obliged to send each manuscript to the federal capital to he checked,
corrected and approved by the review committee. The Government Colleges which
supply many of the authors are branches of the provincial education department, and
their teachers are civil servants in the fullest sense of the word.

The consistency and frequency with which the errors appear in every book and the
uniformity of the bias which makes the writing of it create the suspicion that a master
script was prepared by one individual or a small team, and all authors were ordered to
follow its contents. The language and details of the prescribed themes and topics were

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 198



then tailored to suit each class. This suspicion gains strength from the fact that the
exaggerations and distortions of the books relied the official mind.

Authors and Teachers

The authors may have two excuses to offer: that they are employees of the government
and therefore not free agents, and that anyway they agree with what they have written.
The first excuse is inadmissible. because they offered their services not only voluntarily
but backed with entreaties and the pulling of wires. The second is self-incriminatory,
because thus they confess to owing allegiance to and spreading lies, and thus
misleading the young minds of the country. In both cases, they have made truth an
apprentice to expediency. They are more frightened of their superiors than of appearing
ridiculous. By thus poisoning the well of knowledge from the bottom upwards they
have betrayed the education they received, the profession to which they belong and the
trust which have reposed in them.

The teachers are blameworthy on three counts. First, all the authors are from that class.
Secondly, their acquiescence in teaching, year after year, what they know to be wrong is
a proof of a total lack of probity. Thirdly, they have put themselves in a self-made cleft.
If they know that what they are teaching is nonsense they are guilty of being a party to
an intellectual crime of immeasurable dimensions. If they believe that they are teaching
the right things their "minds know nothing, nothing care to know".

A discussion of the role of the authors and teachers leads to some further
considerations.

The authors divide themselves into two classes: serving or retired teachers and
educationists. The first category is remarkably representative of the people who have
joined, voluntarily or unwillingly, the profession of molding the minds and advancing
the knowledge of the young generation. It comes from the major universities (Punjab,
Peshawar, Quaid-i-Azam, Allama Iqbal Open) and the best-known colleges of the
country as well as from several obscure and third-rate colleges situated in out-of-the-
way towns like Saidu Sharif, Kohat, Mandi Bahauddin and Qasur. It includes people
with doctorates and other degrees from good Western universities, those with local
research training, and those with master's degrees from Pakistani universities (some in
two or three subjects, some with gold medals and other distinctions to their credit). Its
membership ranges all the way from well-known university professors and directors of
research institutes and academies through, heads of departments in good colleges to
obscure lecturers in inferior colleges. Similarly, the second category of educationists
stretches from vice-chancellors and registrars through senior civil servants to employees
of textbook boards. (A complete list of these planners, authors, editors and supervisors
is given in Appendix B).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 199



In formal terms both categories are highly qualified, with proper home or foreign
degrees, long experience in teaching or administration, and directorship of research
institutions. Several of them have been full professors at universities and post-graduate
colleges, but without having produced any scholarly work; there are examples of men
with degrees from the best universities of the world becoming professors, deans, pro-
vice-chancellors and vice-chancellors without even getting their doctoral thesis
published. In the textbook boards themselves there are advisers, senior editors, editors,
senior subject specialists, subject specialists, and supervisors.

It seems that the makers of the textbooks have every merit except integrity. They have
knowledge, otherwise (at least) foreign universities would not have declared them
successful. They enjoy some standing in the profession, otherwise they would not be
holding respectable academic appointments. They have a reputation of a kind,
otherwise the government would not have asked them to write these books. They are
neither ignorant nor simple.

But, alas! They have no integrity. I make this accusation on two grounds. First, they
have put in the books what they know to be wrong. The young generation of textbook
writers (particularly those of it who have had no foreign education) may have one
excuse to plead in its defence: that it has been brought up on these books since the 1960s
and knows nothing written outside them. But it is a bad excuse, not an explanation or
justification. Hundreds of books written by foreign and Pakistani scholars which
contain correct information are available in our libraries. The young textbook writer and
his editor should have read them. They did not. The older generation (especially those
among it who have foreign qualifications in history and allied disciplines) has
absolutely nothing to say in self-defence. They know the facts. They have been trained
to find out facts. They were taught how to distinguish between true and false evidence.
They have forgotten all that they learned. If that is so, they have no right to teach. Or,
they remember well what true history is but write something else in the textbooks. They
have no right to be authors. That is my first charge: that they tell lies to the students.

The second accusation is even more serious (if anything can be more heinous than
telling a lie). By agreeing to write textbooks (in fact, most of them insisted or begged or
used other means to be able to do so) they have usurped the right of the school-teacher.

All over the world school-books are written by those who teach in schools. It is their
metier. They know the mind of the school student. They understand his psychology, his
capacity to comprehend new facts, his needs, his absorbing power, his ability to see
through a deception. They are aware of the damage a bad book can do to his
personality. They are familiar with the natural growth of his brain, and can judge what
should be taught to him in this year and what should be added to it in the following
year. Graduating and apportioning the teaching material is their job.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 200



There is more to be said for the schoolmaster. He teaches. He alone knows how to feed
his flock. He communicates with his class. He establishes a rapport with it. He explains
what the book says. He amplifies the text. He passes on what he knows to those put in
his charge. He answers their questions; he solves their difficulties; he sets the question
papers; he examines the scripts; he passes or fails them. He spends 35-40 years of this
life among them. They are his living, his focus and hub, his pith and fibre, his mind and
breath. They are his life. And he looks after their moral and intellectual welfare at a
wage which will be unacceptable to the woman who sweeps our house every looming.

But the school-teacher has nothing to do whatsoever with the preparation of the book
from which he teaches every day. He has not written it. He cannot change or amend its
contents. He cannot use a different textbook. He has not been consulted about the book
which he uses. He cannot suggest changes: nobody would entertain them. He cannot
complain: nobody would listen to him. He is not asked for his opinion: nobody is
interested in that. He is in a position worse than the student's. Tile student can refuse to
read the book, fail his examination, and leave the school. The teacher has no such
option. He will go hungry if he refuses to use the book. The book rules over him.

And who plans and writes and edits this almighty book? The professor of history at the
University of the Punjab or the Head of the Department of Political Science at the
Government College, Lahore, or an Associate Professor of International Relations at the
Quaid-i-Azam University, or the Deputy Director General of Sports of the Government
of Pakistan, or the Director of the Quaid-i-Azam Academy, or the Director of the
Research Society of Pakistan, or some "subject specialist" of a Textbook Board, or the
principal of a college.

None of these learned and highly-placed authors has ever been inside a school since he
passed his matriculation examination, which may have been 40 years ago. He has never
talked to a schoolmaster, professionally (there is nothing in common) or socially (how
insulting even to suggest it!). He has forgotten his schooldays and the books which he
read. His own interest in teaching is limited to the salary he receives, the promotion he
hopes in get, and the extra money he wants to make. This interest is pursued through
occasional lecturing based on old notes. His reading is severely limited. His writings are
inspired by greed. If he is studious and fond of seeing his name in print, he writes for
the newspapers (but even such a professor is a rara avis). If he is diligent and does not
want his name to be publicized, he prepares guidebooks. "made easics", notes, guess
papers with answers, and solved examination papers of past years; all this brings in
money. If he has influence or can borrow somebody's influence, he writes textbooks.
But in most cases he writes nothing.

Why is the schoolmaster kept away from writing the textbooks? There are two answers
to the question, each illustrative of the society in which we live.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 201



1. The school-teacher is placed so low boils in the civil service hierarchy and in the
social scale that he does not count for anything. The primary school-teacher is bracketed
with gardeners and drivers. The high school-teacher's salary and conditions of service
almost equate those of a WAPDA chaprasi. Domestic servants and municipal sweepers
have greater freedom of negotiation and, within their own class, more respect than the
teacher commands in the community at large. He is only fit "to teach boys and girls" —
a phrase in common use in Pakistan to describe the dregs of society. He is not worth
even considering as a possible author of a book which every student will read.

2. Textbook writing is a lucrative business. When a book sells a hundred thousand
or more copies a year the contract to write it is a prize wools fighting for; even if, as is
often the case there are two or three joint authors, It takes about a month to write the
book. Set this time against the money that rolls in, and you know why university
professors with foreign degrees and senior college lecturers and principals of colleges
vie with one another in the field of authorship. Influence is mustered, recommendations
are collected, wires are pulled, friendships are used, favors are promised, threats are
held out, bribes are given — the competition is tough and the goal a great temptation.
Where does the schoolteacher stand in this race? Nowhere. The best qualified person is
not even allowed to try. He is only forced to teach from the nonsense written up by a
D.Phil. from Oxford or a Ph.D. from Washington or an M.Sc. from London.

It must be said, in passing but with emphasis, that this offers a further explanation for
the poor quality of our school education. The schoolmaster, already overburdened with
the tensions, disappointments, poverty, inferiority complex and other frustrations of his
vocation, now suffers a new chagrin of having no say in the preparation of the book
which is his only professional tool and channel of communicating knowledge to his
students.

It must also be said, again in passing but with equal emphasis, that the complaints of
the college and university professors about the poor standard of the "matriculates" and
graduates who clamor for admission at their portals are completely unjustified. They
blame the school-teacher for sending them ignorant louts. They forget that these
bumpkins were brought up on the stuff written by themselves to make money. Both the
professor and the schoolteacher are at the receiving end. The first gets the cash, the
second the stick. In each case what is given is undeserved. The professor gets a salary
which is larger than his merit, and supplements it with textbook writing, preparation of
notes, examinerships, invigilation (which is a gold mine these days) and private illegal
tuition (often given within college hours). The school-teacher receives meagre wages, is
maltreated by his superiors in the education department, teaches long hours, and
cannot afford to house, feed and clothe his family.

It is a strange world in which the unscrupulous and the incompetent professor, not
content with what he has, fattens himself at the expense of the already poor school-

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 202



teacher, and in his rapacious greed destroys the educational system. I have more
evidence to give strength to this conviction.

I wish I had an opportunity to interview the writers of the textbooks and to ask them
one straight and hard question: why did you write what you wrote? I am glad to report
that at least one answer to this question is on record. To this very inquiry made by Miss
Aliya Inam, Dr. Hasan Askar Rizwi, author or co-author of textbooks for classes 6, 7, 9-
10 and intermediate, responded with gruff frankness and naive charm. He said that if
he had not done it someone else would have. "I just thought I would do a better job than
some rigid ideologue." He added that he worked according to a set of guidelines
provided to him (by whom?). "We were told what to stress and what to avoid. And
even after that, my draft was edited by a federal committee which took out names of
people and lines it didn't like". (Aliya loam, "Telling it Like It Wasn't", The Friday Times,
Lahore, 19-25 March 1992). And even after that Dr. Rizwi allowed the book to be
published under his name. One of the readers of his apologia was revolted, called it
spurious and dishonest, and made the telling point that "he who subjects innocent and
impressionable children to such falsehood would not hesitate to cheat his God"
(Barrister Baccha, from Peshawar, letter, The Friday Times, 9-15 April 1992).

Ah! Watery consciences do our academic community make.

And the academic community also does not know what it says. Professor Mehdi Raza
Beg retired on 5 July 1992 after having taught political science for many many years at
the Government College, Lahore, and three days before bowing out gave the world the
benefit of his views. "Teaching is not a respectable profession" because there is no rapid
upward mobility; he himself had got promoted only twice in 35 years. Nor was he
happy with the syllabi "which are based on distortion of facts. We are teaching false
things to our generation". He was also scathingly critical of the standard of education. "I
hold heads of departments responsible for this. They are least interested in the
educational standard of their departments. They have assigned themselves more
important tasks like making arrangements for picnic panics and extra-curricular
functions. Above all, their most important duty seems to celebrate birthday parties of
female students."

And yet Professor Beg is a brazen-faced optimist. There is nothing wrong with the
system, he says in the same breath. "The system is all right. It is this very system that
has produced so many great people. The same system operated before Partition. The
majority of the Indo-Pak intellectuals and leaders were product of this system. Our
present intellectuals are a product of the same system." (M. A. Zaidi, "Interview: 'There
is nothing Wrong with our Education System— , Nation, Lahore, Friday Magazine, 3
July 1992; exactly half the space given to the article is occupied by a nice color
photograph of the professor).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 203



The teaching profession is no longer respectable, indeed!

History for the Elite

We must now briefly look at a parallel but different education system and its teachers to
find out if money can buy a better knowledge of history.

Private English-medium schools are of two kinds. The great majority matches the
official school in quality, premises, facilities, teachers and methods of instruction. Their
number tens into thousands in each province. There are said to be 2,000 of them in
Lahore alone. They offer nothing different from the government schools except the
medium in which they leach, though their standard of English is as low as elsewhere.
The only reason for their existence and proliferation is the ambition of the middle class
to be seen to belong to the upper middle class. For the fulfillment of this desire it pays at
least ten times more in fees and funds.

Then there is a small category of the so-called elite or prestigious schools in big cities,
with high-sounding European names, large buildings, prosperous clientele, highly paid
teachers, and fees and charges which are exorbitant by any standard and outrageous by
Pakistani standards. As there is a lot of money in the pockets of a certain class, they are
crowded and bring in huge incomes to their owners. The average teacher is paid three
to six times more than the government school teacher. But this does not mean that the
staff is qualitatively superior. The teacher's connections are better than his
qualifications, and his qualifications better than his abilities. He is a product of the local
educational system with a degree from a local university.

Most of these "elite" schools prepare candidates for the British General Certificate of
Education which is awarded by the Local Examinations Syndicate of the University of
Cambridge. I don't know which special textbooks are used by these schools, but the
reports of the chief examiner reflect badly on both the books and the teachers, and fully
bear out my criticism of the textbooks.

In the years 1988-90, according to the report of the chief examiner in the paper of
Pakistan Studies, a "considerable proportion" of the examinees had a "very unsound"
understanding of Pakistani history and culture. Many candidates wrote about the
nineteenth century when they were asked a question about the eighteenth. Some
confused regional and national languages. The standard was generally low. The
candidates failed to distinguish satisfactorily between "ideology" and "history". They
"lacked factual knowledge" about the lives of Muhammad bin Qasim and Mahmud
Ghuznawi. A few confused Sayyid Ahmad Barelawi with Sir Sayyid Ahmed Khan. On
Chaudhri Rahmat Ali the answers were "on the whole unexpectedly weak" and "many
were very inaccurate": this illustrates "the dangers of cramming too closely from the
textbook". In all previous examinations also the candidates showed ignorance about

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 204



Bengal in the decision of 1947 and also about the factors leading to the creation of
Bangladesh. The examiners were also "surprised that many candidates showed very
inaccurate knowledge about the stages in the Quaid-i-Azam's life and political career".
Many could not distinguish between the Lahore Resolution and the Objectives
Resolution. In questions on education in Pakistan "very few were able to distinguish
adequately between the 'quantity' and 'quality' of education".

After making these specific points the chief examiner has some general comments
which ought to be quoted here. "Teacher should encourage their pupils to develop a
sound and critical approach to the events preceding the foundation of Pakistan, and a
factually accurate understanding of the evolution of the country between 1947 and the
present day. Candidates for this, and earlier entries, often let themselves down on the
'historical' aspects of the syllabus by showing only a vague, and sometimes inaccurate
knowledge of the evolution of Islamic government and institutions in South Asia. On
the 'cultural' side candidates seem too easily satisfied with repeating platitudes on
matters of tradition and custom without showing any close knowledge of the specific
national, regional or local context in which they are being discussed, candidates should
therefore be advised to prepare themselves thoroughly by consulting not only the
textbook for the course, but also by using other works of reference such as
encyclopedias and standard historical texts. They should also be advised to avoid an
overtly polemical tone in answering historical questions. Candidates do, of course, hold
very committed views on some of the subjects included in this syllabus, but while the
examiners welcome the reasoned exposition of all viewpoints, one of the main reasons
for the rather poor performance of a large number of candidates reflects a failure to
provide supporting evidence for some of the views expressed." (Islamiyat, Pakistan
Studies, School Certificate/GCE, Ordinary Level, Chief Examiner's Report on the November
1989 Examination, Local Examinations Syndicate, University of Cambridge, Cambridge).

These remarks on the performance of the candidates sent up by our "elite" schools
prove that low quality education is being sold at a very high price. And yet the market
is booming.

Why do parents send their children to such schools? First, they have more money than
they know what to do with. Investing it in the child's education is probably the only
sensible use they make of it. Secondly, they belong to the highly Westernized class
which prizes fluency in spoken English above the contents of the knowledge received.
Thirdly, a GCE facilitates the child's admission to the best local colleges, or enables the
above average child to proceed to the advanced level examination, and if he does well
in that he may find it possible to enter a British university. Thirdly, in spite of their
"good" education, the parents are not aware of the quality of education being given to
their child. How many of them read the chief examiners report on the subjects their
child studies? Finally, and this is the most important factor, educating your child in

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 205



these schools is a status symbol required to prove your credentials for membership of
the elite class.

Superficially, there are several advantages of this school system. The student gains
confidence, and can express himself in English with some ease (though the quality of
his written English is low, as witnessed in the passages from his scripts quoted by the
chief examiner; but in our society it is the spoken word which stamps and grades a
person, not his ability to write). He is credited with a good background for the simple
reason that he went to this kind of school. The most highly respected and admired
attribute in this society is the possession of wealth (no questions asked about its
origins). That is why these schools flourish. He does better than other candidates when
he is interviewed for a job. Family connection, school background and the sound of
GCE are enough to predispose any selection board in his favor. This is another reason
for the appeal these schools have for the more ambitious parents.

Yet, these "elite" schools fail the final test of the ability to provide sound education.
How is their product different from that of the ordinary English-medium school or even
of a government school? Only in social status (which the student brought with himself,
the school did not bestow it on him), and oral expression in English (which is
uncommon but not rare among students of other kinds of schools). Otherwise his
mental and intellectual equipment is on a par with that of other students. At least, as far
as the compulsory subject of Pakistan Studies is concerned, his knowledge is faulty and
inaccurate, his ignorance of elementary facts wide-ranging and profound, his
understanding of the question asked slight, his dependence on memorizing without
grasping patent, his addiction to sweeping platitudes ineradicable, his preference for
ideology over truth conspicuous, and his written English pedestrian if not downright
unreadable. These failings are mentioned again and again by his chief examiner.

The textbook is once again the chief culprit. I assume that for British history or physics
or mathematics the GCE candidate uses foreign textbooks. But for Pakistan Studies
(history and culture) he has to read the local books. It does not matter what fees the
school charges or how fluently the teacher lectures or what library facilities are
available. As long as the student depends on the Pakistani textbook (and the chief
examiner complains that he reads nothing else), his knowledge of history is exactly the
same as that of any other student-who goes to a third-rate government school. All the
wealth and care lavished on his education are a dead loss because of the textbook.

Without Demur

If the textbooks are as bad as I have demonstrated them to be, why don't Pakistanis
speak out against them? Part of the question has been answered by the observations I
have made in earlier pages. But let us consider the point further.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 206



Who is going to raise his voice, and why? Usually protest arises from need or ability or
courage, or any combination of these three. Are these factors present in our society or in
the system under which we live?

Need emerges from want and awareness. If there is something missing in my life and
the deficiency angers me, I feel the need to protest. Even then, I may not be able to
protest because I don't care or I know that the expostulation will be useless or for some
other reason. Even if driven by need and ability, I may still refuse to protest because I
am a coward or I fear reprisals or I am weak or I have been asked to keep quiet.

Coming from the abstract to the concrete, who should or can or is going to protest? Not
the educational bureaucracy, which has sired these textbooks. Not the historian or social
scientist, who has concocted them. Not the teacher who uses them every day, for the
reasons given already. Not the student, who can't know the poison he is being fed.

That only leaves us with the parents, the minds of whose children are being damaged
systematically, pitilessly and irreparably. But, who are the parents? They are civil
servants, military officers, business executives, traders, teachers, doctors, engineers and
other professional men and women — all of them products of the same educational
system and memorizers of the same textbooks. They do not remonstrate because they
don't feel the need to do so. Or, they are the petty shopkeepers, factory labourers,
transport drivers, peasants and other members of the proletariat class — all without the
advantage of education, who have sent their children to school in the hope that the next
generation might be better placed in life than their own. They are eager and enthusiastic
and anxious and self-sacrificing. But they know nothing of what their children are being
taught. They don't protest because they don't have the ability to do so. As for the
mythical abstraction, so greatly favored by the statistician and the demographer and the
imprudent social scientist, the "common man" or the "man in the street", such a
convenient type does not exist. Or, if he does exist, his mind has been impaired by the
radio and the television and the newspapers and the digests as completely and
effectively as his child's is being dislocated by the textbook. He does not protest because
he does not care.

Thus it has come to pass that the game of educating the child is being played with a
reckless abandon which leads straight to disaster because the players, the umpires, the
onlookers and the crowd outside the ground have neither the interest in improving the
system, nor the knowledge of what is wrong with it, nor the ability to devise a better
one, nor the courage to shout a word of warning — not even the strength to shout.

The Bitter Fruit

The indifference of the adults is distressing. But even more grievous is the effect these
textbooks have on the mind of the student and, over the years. on the character of the

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 207



citizen. It may well sound as an exaggeration to the uninitiated, but as a teacher and a
historian I am convinced that most of the ills from which the country has suffered in the
past and is still suffering have their root cause in the textbooks in use. The failure of
democracy, the long spells of military dictatorship, corruption, moral laxity,
deterioration in character, decline in moral values, sense of irresponsibility, terrorism,
sectarian strife, inefficiency, cynicism, indifference to what the future holds for us — all
this is the bitter harvest from the seeds we use in the cultivation of the minds of the
young.

Let me explore the dimensions of the injury inflicted by the textbook on the student's
mind. Briefly speaking, the textbooks are training and bringing up the students in
ignorance, bias and false logic. Ignorance and bias travel together because one
reinforces and encourages the other. Through them the textbooks elevate the prejudice
of the society into a set of moral absolutes. They offer carefully chosen prejudices and
lies and distortions in carelessly chosen words. The sound of the authors' grinding axes
come loud and clear. always adding up the pros, always dismissing the cons, always
giving a partial view, always presenting a glorious past and a healthy present and a
rose-hued future.

As for arguing logically or telling the truth or facing the reality, the authors of these
books, far from pursuing the subjects, do not even stroll in their direction. They are too
busy in assaulting common sense. Their dialectic is unruffled by any self-questioning.
Have they ever tried to arraign themselves before the bar of intelligence?

Such writers leave a permanent mark on the mind of the student. A generation reared
on this stuff is doomed to several crippling disadvantages throughout its life. The
student is invited to share the confusion of the author. One example will do. The
textbooks go on repeating, presumably in the cause of "national ideology" and under
official instructions, that Pakistan is a "fortress of Islam". The school-going student is
taught this by his teacher and memorizes the sentence for examination purposes. But
from the same teacher and from his parents and other relatives he hears every day
complaints about corruption. black-marketing, hypocritical behaviour, police torture,
breakdown of law and order and oppression by the government. His mind cannot
relate what he reads in the book with what he hears from everyone he meets. The result
is confusion past speaking. We offer him only three options: to stop thinking and live in
an imaginary world, to equate Islam with all the evils of society, or to develop a split
personality. A young, healthy. growing mind has been turned into a schizophrenic.

Secondly, the student is trained to accept historical misstatements on the authority of
the book. If education is a preparation for adult life, he learns first to accept without
question, and later to make his own contribution to the creation of historical fallacies,
and still later to perpetuate what he has learnt. In this way, ignorant authors are leading

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 208



innocent students to hysterical conclusions. The process of the writers' mind provides
excellent material for a manual on logical fallacies.

Thirdly, the student is told nothing about the relationship between evidence and truth.
The truth is what the book ordains and the teacher repeats. No source is cited. No proof
is offered. No argument is presented. The authors play a dangerous game of winks and
nods and faints and gestures with evidence. The art is taught well through precept and
example. The student grows into a young man eager to deal in assumptions but inapt in
handling inquiries. Those who become historians produce narratives patterned on the
textbooks on which they were brought up.

Fourthly, the student is compelled to face a galling situation in his later years when he
comes to realize that what he had learnt at school and college was not the truth.
Imagine a graduate of one of our best colleges at the start of his studies in history in a
university in Europe. Every lecture he attends and every book he reads drive him mad
with exasperation, anger and frustration. He makes several grim discoveries. Most of
the "facts", interpretations and theories on which he had been fostered in Pakistan now
turn out to have been a fata morgana, an extravaganza of fantasies and reveries, myths
and visions, whims and utopias, chimeras and fantasies.

How does he react? There are several possibilities. He accepts the new knowledge and
rejects everything he had learnt at home, while cursing his native teachers. Or, he hangs
between doubt and belief, unwilling to hold his Pakistani teachers to have been liars
and cheats, but at the same time unable to reject all that he is now reading. Or, he finds
that long years of brainwashing have taken their toll and deprived him of the capacity
of independent thinking; he completes his studies as an intellectual non-person, a
scholar in limbo, because he does not want to go back without a degree; but he lives a
tortured life.

Whichever way he takes out of his predicament, his mind is disturbed and his power of
coherent thinking weakened. He carries the mark of quandary with him all his life —
neither believing nor disbelieving, not knowing what is wrong and what is right,
without convictions or firm opinions, without assurance or faith, without peace of
mind, without life's certainties. Our textbooks have reduced him to a tremulous mass of
jelly instead of a stable human mind, in a permanent state of perplexity, always caught
in a dilemma. His mental and intellectual destruction is completed, past cure, past
remedy. He will spend his life repeating je rte sais gum like a parrot.

Finally, the textbooks are giving an education in suppressed self. They should have
provoked the students, not blindfolded them; created curiosity and inquisitiveness, not
brainwashed them: shown the wounds on the body politic, not praised the tyrant who
inflicted them: shouted a warning to the young, not sung a siren song. They are
producing persons who obey orders, not those who think for themselves. The school

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 209



students have become mannequins. Masters bark orders like drill sergeants and
demand ready and instant obedience. Instead of citizens with awakened minds, they
have given us robots without a mind and without a conscience. In the long run they
have given us an ignorant nation which has no care in the world.

The End of the Road

I am sure that the mess that I have discovered in my dismal journey through the
textbooks on history, Social Studies and Pakistan Studies is not limited to these subjects.
If a few qualified private scholars were to make a detailed and systematic scrutiny of
the books prescribed or prepared for the students of Islamiyat, Political Science and
English (to take only three important Fields) they are bound to find that the authors
have made a similar muddle of things. Then we would know what kind of Islam is
being preached in the classroom, what novel political theories and notions and values
are being passed on to the young, and which type of English is being taught to our
children. Similarly, a study of our textbooks on science would reveal some terrifying
facts. Is it too much to hope that someone will extent the scope of my inquiry and dig
into other disciplines?

My suggestion is rooted in the vastness of the dimensions of the wrong being done to
the nation. Let me explore the size of the area affected by the injury.

By a rough reckoning there are about 25 million students on the rolls of classes 1-14.
Add to these the following categories:

1. Private students, who don't attend schools and colleges but study these books
and appear in the examinations, approximately a quarter of a million.

2. Students preparing for degrees in law, medicine, science, agriculture,
engineering, fine arts, etc., who are obliged to take up Pakistan Studies, say one
hundred thousand.

3. Candidates appearing in the competitive examinations held by the Federal and
all provincial Public Service Commissions to recruit civil servants of various levels, and
more recently the competitive tests devised by the banks to recruit their officer class.
These candidates re-read the textbooks or come to them for the first time; all of them
prepare for the compulsory paper on Pakistan Studies. Thai is another one hundred
thousand.

4. Students studying in the Pakistani schools opened abroad; number unknown.

5. There may be some other categories which I have missed.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 210



With these new figures added to the number of regular students we get a grant total of
over 25 million. It is past enduring to contemplate that on every working day of the
week 25 million young minds are assailed with inaccurate facts, wrong dates,
misrepresentation of confirmed and well-established truths and events, and blatant
official propaganda of such crude character.

The assault does not stop here. About one hundred thousand teachers, tutors and
professors consult these books every evening in preparation of the next morning's
lesson. They read with more attention and care than do their pupils because they have
to teach from and out of them. This daily duty done over a length of time becomes a
harrowingly efficient engine of brainwashing. That is not all. The trouble spreads to
unsuspected places. Other members of the staff, who may be teaching zoology or
physics or mathematics, but are interested to varying degrees in national history and
current politics, team the "facts" from these colleagues. The staff room pollution
touches, say, another half a million men and women.

Assuming that three students come from one nuclear home, we have at least eight
million households where these hooks are in daily use. Many parents take some interest
in their children's studies; some coach them; a few read these books casually to kill time
or to know what the little ones are being taught at school. Even illiterate parents in the
villages and small towns and the slums of the cities learn from the books in their
conversations with the children round the homestead hearth. Eight million homes
amount to eight million parents (father plus mother), not counting other family
members like grandparents, uncles, aunts and older brothers and sisters. In his way the
nonsense written in the books is conveyed to another sixteen million persons.

The damage goes still further. Some of the people bred on these books become
journalists, columnists and editors of popular magazines and digests. The editors
approve for publication the contributions they receive. The writers write according to
their lights (lights which have been set burning by these books). About half a million
people feed themselves on these magazines and digests and (especially Urdu)
newspapers. If each copy of this "literature" is read by four persons on an average, the
number of recipients of this distorted information jumps to two million.

Thus millions enter the pen of ignorance without knowing what they are doing.

Of course, there is much overlapping in my figures. The same people are parents as
well as digest-readers. Teachers are also parents. And so on. Yet, making all possible
allowances for the margin of duplication, we are still left with a very conservative figure
of say thirty million people being told what they should not be told and hearing what
they should not hear. When we recall that this group contains within itself the social
and intellectual elite and the actual or potential leadership of the country, we have
nothing but stark despair staring us in the face and promising rack and ruin.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 211



Is anybody listening?

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 212



APPENDIX — A

Textbooks examined by Class, Language and Number

Number of Urdu Number of English
Class

Books Books

1 2 2
2 2 2
3 3 2
4 3 I
5 4 2
6 4 1
7 4 2
8 4 2
10-Sep 5 3
12-Nov 6 2
13-14 9 1
Total 46 20

Grand total 66

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 213



APPENDIX - B

The Makers of Textbooks

List of planners, advisers, authors, editors, revisers and supervisors of the 66 textbooks
examined in this work. The first set of parentheses encloses their degrees and ranks.
wherever known; the second encloses the classes for which the textbooks were
prepared.

Abbasi, Abdul Majid (M.A., B.T., KEd.). (Adviser for 3; convenor, author and chief
editor for 4: editor for 5).

Abbasi, Muhammad Yusuf (M.A., Ph.D.; former professor of history at various
universities). (Adviser for B.A.).

Afzal, Muhammad Rafique (M.A., Ph.D.; Associate Professor of History, Quaid-i-Azam
University, Islamabad). (Reviser for B.A.).

Ahmad, Bashir (Senior Editor for B.A.).

Ahmad, Chaudhri Nisar (Professor of History, Government College, Faisalabad).
(Author for F.A.).

Ahmad, Faizan (Principal, Government Degree College, Kohat). (Author for 9-10).

Ahmad, Muhammad Bashir (M.A., History. Gold Medallist: M.A., Political Science;
Diploma in International Relations; Diploma in Journalism; Diploma in Library Science;
presumably all from the University of the Punjab; Professor of History, Government
College, Baghbanpura. Lahore). (Author for B.A.).

Ahmad, Qazi Sajjad (Author for 4).

Ahmad, Tauseef (Research Associate, Institute of Manpower, Government of Pakistan.
Islamabad). (Author for B.A.). Ahsan, Malik Amiruddin (Author for 8).

Akhtar, Bashir Mahmud (Editor for B.A.).

Akhtar, Muhammad Salim (Senior Subject Specialist). (Editor for 9-10 and F.A.).

Alam, Muhammad Jahangir (Author for B.A.).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 214



Ali, K. (Professor). (Author for B.A.).

Ashraf, Zarina (Mrs.). (Author for 5).

Aslam, Mian Muhammad (Author for 9-10).

Aslam, Muhammad (Professor). (Author for 7; Editor for 9-10; Author and Reviser for
B.A.).

Azhari, Qazi Mujibur Rahman al (Ph.D.; Dean, Faculty of Islamic Studies and Arabic,
University of Peshawar). (Supervisor for B.A.).

Aziz, Muhammad Abdul (Ph.D.; Director, West Pakistan Bureau of Education, Lahore:
M.A., Aligarh; M.A., London; Ph.D., Indiana). (Author for 5).

Bakht, Iqbal Ahmad (Assistant Professor). (Author for F.A. and B.A.).

Baloch, Ghulam Hasan (of Dera Ismail Khan). (Author for 4).

Beg, Mirza Ishaque (M.A., MEd., LL.B.). (Author for 4).

Bukhari, Muhammad Saleh Shah (Ph.D.). (Editor for 5).

Bukhari, S.A. (M.A.). (Author for F.A.).

Bukhari, Sayyid Masud Haider (Professor, Government College, Sahiwal). (Author for
F.A.).

Chaudhri, Khalid Hayat (Research Associate, Institute of Manpower, Government of
Pakistan, Islamabad). (Author for B.A.).

Chaudhri, Naseer Ahmad (Professor of Political Science, Murray College, Sialkot).
(Author for B.A.).

Chaudhri, Rafique (Professor of History, Government College, Faisalabad). (Author for
B.A.).

Cheemah, Ghulam Sarwar (Professor of History, Government College, Lahore). (Author
for B.A.).

Checmah, Parvez Iqbal (Associate Professor of International Relations, Quaid-i-Azam
University. Islamabad). (Author for B.A.).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 215



Chughtai, Muniruddin (M.A., D.Phil., Oxford: Professor of Political Science, University
of the Punjab). (Author and Adviser for B.A.).

Dani, A.H. (Ph.D.; Professor Emeritus of History, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad).
(Adviser for B.A.).

Dar, Khwaja Saeeduddin Ahmad (Head of the Department of International Relations.
Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad). (Author for F.A.; Author, Adviser and Reviser
for B.A.).

Daudi, Matibul Anwar (Author for 3).

Dhanani, Muhammad Rafique (Professor). (Author for 8).

Din, Muhammad (Ph.D., Department of Islamic Studies, University of Peshawar).
(Author for B.A.).

Faruqi, Abdur Rauf (Professor. Government Jahanzeb College, Saidu Sharif). (Convenor
for 5; Author for 6).

Ghafur, Chaudhri Abdul (M.A.; M.Sc., Aligarh; B.A. Honours, London; Senior Editor.
West Pakistan Textbook Board, Lahore). (Author for 6 and 8).

Halim, Muhammad (Subject Specialist). (Editor for 3 and 4; Reviser for 5; Reviser and
Editor for 6 and 7; Editor and Supervisor for 8; Editor and Reviser for 9-10).

Hamed, Azhar (Ph.D.). (Author for 4, 7 and 8; Author and Editor for F.A.; Author and
Adviser for B.A.).

Hamid, Abdul (M.A.; Ph.D.; Professor of History and Political Science, Government
College, Lahore; Professor of History, University of the Punjab; Director, West Pakistan
Textbook Board, Lahore; Director, Research Society of Pakistan, Lahore). (Reviser for 6;
Author for 9-10; Author and Adviser for B.A.).

Hamid, M.F. (Author for 3).

Haq, Anwaarul (Editor for B.A.).

Haq, Inamul (Reviser for B.A.).

Hashmi, Anwar (Author for F.A.).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 216



Hashmi, Mutahir (Professor, Government Jahanzeb College, Saida Sharif). (Author for
4).

Haye, Khwaja A. (Ph.D.; former Head of Department of Modern Subjects, Pakistan
Military Academy, Kakut). (Author for 7).

Husain, Ansar (Professor). (Author for 8).

Husain, Makhdum Tassadaq (Ph.D.; former Professor at the University of the Punjab).
(Author for B.A.).

Husain, Zahid (Professor, Government Degree College, Qasur). (Author for B.A.).

Hydari. Karam (Professor). (Reviser for B.A.).

Ibrahim, Asma (Author for 5).

Ilahi, Mariam K. (Miss; Ph.D.; Professor of Geography, University of the Punjab,
Lahore). (Author for 3).

Inamuddin, Muhammad (B.Com.; B.Ed.). (Author for 9-10).

Iqbal, Javed (Author for 9-10).

Israruddin (Professor of Geography, University of Peshawar). (Editor and Reviser for 6,
7 and 8).

Jaffery, S. Hamid Ali (West Pakistan Education Service. Senior Class I, retired). (Author
for 5, 6, 7 and 8; Reviser for 9-10).

Jafri, Sayyid Munir Ali (Author for 9-10).

Jamil, Khwaja Muniruddin (Ph.D.). (Adviser for B.A.).

Javed, Hifsa (Mrs.; Subject Specialist). (Editor for 3: Supervisor for 4; Author. Editor and
Supervisor for 6, 7 and 8; Supervisor for 9-10; Editor for B.A.).

Kakakhel, Muhammad Nazir (Ph.D.; Professor of Political Science, University of
Peshawar). (Author for 7 and 8; Author, Editor and Reviser for 9-10).

Kazmi, Ali Shabbar (Author for 3).

Khalid, Alauddin (Reviser for 3).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 217



Khan, Ghulam Abid (Author for 9-10).

Khan, Muhammad Raza (Professor, Government College, Dora Ismail Khan). (Author
for 4).

Khan, Muhammad Zafar Ahmad (Ph.D.; Principal, Government College. Asghar Mall,
Rawalpindi). (Author for B.A.).

Khan, Nisar Muhammad (Professor, Government Degree College. Mardan). (Author for
9-10).

Khan, Quibuddin (B.A.; B.Ed.. Aligarh). (Author for I, 2 and 3).

Khan, Shahbaz (Ph.D.). (Author for 8).

Khan, Yar Muhammad (M.A.; Ph.D., London; Professor of History, University of the
Punjab). (Author for F.A.). Khattak. Timor (Professor of Geography, University of
Peshawar). (Author for 8).

Khilji, Alauddin (Professor. College of Education, University of Peshawar). (Author for
3. 6 and 8).

Khokhar, Fida Husain (Author for 3).

Mahmood, Safdar (Ph.D.; Deputy Director General, Pakistan Sports Board, Government
of Pakistan, Islamabad). (Author for F.A.; Adviser and Reviser for B.A.).

Mahmud, Sayyid Fayyaz (Group Captain, retired, Pakistan Air Force, Education
Branch; former Director of a literary research project, University of the Punjab). (Author
for 7).

Malick, Saeed Osman (M.A.; M.Sc.. Econ., London School of Economics and Political
Science; Professor of Political Science, GOvernment College. Lahore). (Author for 9-10
and B.A.).

Malik, Bashiruddin (Professor). (Author and Editor for 3, 4 and 5; Author for 7 and 8).

Malik, Din Muhammad (M.A.; Ph.D., Washington; Professor. Institute of Education and
Research, University of the Punjab, Lahore). (Editor and Reviser for 8).

Malik, Muhammad Abdullah (M.A.; Head of the Department of History, Islamia
College, Railway Road, Lahore). (Author for F.A.).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 218



Malik, Nur Muhammad (Editor for 8).

Mallick, Sajjad Haider (Assistant Professor, Gordon College, Rawalpindi). (Author for
B.A.).

Mangalori, Mumtaz (Ph.D.; Senior Subject Specialist). (Editor for 3.4 and 5).

Mangalori, Muhammad Zubair (Research Officer). (Author for 4).

Mansur, Nuzhat (Mrs.). (Author for 3).

Mir, Latif (Chief Instructor, Education Extension Centre. Abbotabad). (Author for 6).

Mirza, Muhammad Shafi (Author for 8).

Muhammad, Sufi Ghulam (Headmaster, Government High School, Akbarpura, NWFP).
(Author for 5).

Muhammad. Wali (Lecturer in Geography, Islamia College, Peshawar). (Author for 3
and 4).

Muhayyuddin, Ahmad (Ph.D.; Vice-Chancellor, Allama Iqbal Open University).
(Adviser for B.A.).

Murawwat, Dilasa Khan (Principal, Jami' High School, Bannu). (Author for 5).

Naheed, Nighat (Author for 6 and 7).

Natig, Abdul Qayyum (former Honorary Professor, Allama Iqbal Open University).
(Author for B.A.).

Nisar, Muhammad (Professor, Government College, Mandan). (Author for 7).

Qadeer, Qazi Abdul (Author for 7 and 8).

Qadri, M. H. (Author for 2).

Qarshi, Aftab Hasan (a hakim of Lahore). (Author for B.A.).

Qazi, Jalil (Adviser for BA.).

Qazi, Sarfraz Husain (Ph.D.). (Author for 8).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 219



Qureshi, A.Q. (M.A.; Post-Graduate Certificate in Education. Cambridge; Head of
Department of Social Studies. Pakistan Air Force Public School, Murree). (Author for 1,
2 and 3).

Qureshi, Anwaarul Haq (Professor, Government College, Gujranwala). (Reviser for
BA.).

Qureshi, Muzaffari (Mrs.; Registrar, Allama Iqbal Open University): (Adviser for B.A.).

Qureshi, Sarfraz K. (PhD; Director of Research, Pakistan Institute of Development
Economic, Islamabad). (Adviser for B.A.).

Rabbani, Muhammad Ikram (Department of Political Science.,Government College,
Lahore). (Author for B.A.).

Rafique, Shaikh Muhammad (Professor of History, Islamia College, Civil Lines,
Lahore). (Author for F.A.).

Rashid, Muhammad (Adviser for B.A.).

Rasul, Sahibzada Abdur (Professor). (Editor for 6; Author for F.A.).

Rathor, Abdul Humid (Coordinator and Adviser for B.A.).

Raza, Sayyid Masud (Editor for 7).

Riaz, Muhammad (Ph.D.; Department of Iqbaliat, where?). (Reviser for B.A.).

Rizvi, Hasan Askar (M.A.; Ph.D.; Associate Professor of Political Science, University of
the Punjab, Lahore). (Author for 6, 7. 9-10 and F.A.).

Rizvi, Sayyia Talmiz Hasnain (M.A.; B.Ed., Gold Medallist). (Author for 4).

Sa'd, Muhammad (Ph.D.). (Reviser for B.A.).

Sadiq, Muhammad ibn-i- (Author for 8).

Sajid, Zakria (Professor). (Author for B.A.).

Saleem, Muhammad (Professor of History, Government Degree College, Mandi
Bahauddin). (Reviser for B.A.).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 220



Sayeeduddin (Lecturer in Pakistan Studies, Mehran University of Engineering and
Technology). (Author for B.A.).

Sayyid, Javed Iqbal (Professor). (Editor and Adviser for BA.).

Sayyid, Muhammad Aslam (Assistant Professor of History, Quaid-i-Azam University,
Islamabad). (Author and Adviser for BA.).

Sethi, Muhammad Ismail (Professor, Member, University Grants Commission,
Government of Pakistan). (Adviser for B.A.).

Shafqat, Saeed (Head of Department of Pakistan Studies, Quaid-i-Azam University,
Islamabad). (Reviser for B.A.).

Shah, Karamat Ali (University Public School, University of Peshawar). (Author for 6).

Shah, Muhammad Ali (Principal, Training School, Dera Ismail Khan). (Author for 4 and
5).

Shahnawaz (Editor for 3; Superviser for 4).

Shaikh, Muhammad Hasan (Ph.D.; Professor). (Author for 8).

Sharif-al-Mujahid (M.A.; Ph.D.; Director, Quaid-i-Azam Academy, Karachi). (Author
and Adviser for BA.).

Shehab, Raflullah (Professor, Government College, Lahore). (Author for F.A.).

Shibli, Muhammad Siddique Khan (M.A.; Ph.D.). (Adviser for B.A.).

Sibt-i-Hasan (Subject Specialist). (Editor for 3; Supervisor for 4 and 5: Editor for 7 and 8;
Supervisor for 9-10; Editor for F.A.).

Siddiqui, Nazir (Author for BA.).

Solangi, Faruq (Adviser for B.A.).

Syed, Farida (Author for 5).

Tariq, Mahmud Ahmad (Professor, Government College, Mardan). (Author for 5).

Umar, Muhammad (Author for 6).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 221



Vaseer, Antinullah (Ph.D.). (Author for F.A.).

Victor, Edgar (Author for 6 and 8).

Yaqub, Muhammad (Professor, Islamia College, Peshawar). (Author for 4).

Yasmin, Firoza (Miss; Ph.D.). (Author for 3; Author and Editor for 4; Author for 5).

Zaman, Sher Muhammad (M.A.; Ph.D.; former Vice-Chancellor, Allama Iqbal Open
University). (Adviser for B.A.).

Note

The title of "Professor" in this list should not mislead the foreign reader. In most cases it
does not mean anything. In Pakistan, every teacher at a college calls himself by this title,
and the authorities have taken no step to stop this practice.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 222



APPENDIX — C

Public Reaction

Letters to The Frontier Post

Mrs. Alys Faiz: 7 May 1992

I follow Mr. K.K. Aziz's "Textbook series" with a great deal of interest and recall a
personal experience.

Some few years back, Faiz decided to "take a look" at his second grandson's textbooks, it
was early 1984.

The boy was in his 10th Class. They decided to have a get-together daily and go
through the text necessary for passing that heinous examination. I can remember some
laughter coming from the verandah.

After a while my grandson came into the kitchen and said, "Mama, I shall have to
become a hypocrite."

"Well, Nana says if you want to pass your examination reproduce this book. You have
no choice. But I have given you an alternative — the truth keep that in mind."

Grandson. I remember, heaved a sigh, then he said, "But what of those who will never
have a choice?"

I remember this incident when I read Mr. Aries articles. What of chase who live their
lives out, unwittingly, as hypocrites, and what of those who make them so?

Professor M.I. Haq: 11 May 1992

Your esteemed daily deserves the gratitude of the whole nation for serializing Mr. K.K.
Aziz's insightful and painstakingly-written articles (FP, April 17 to May 2) on the
howlers, cheap propaganda, disinformation and hypocritical statements contained in
our officially compiled and prescribed textbooks, particularly in the compulsory subject
of Pakistan Studies, and History at the elementary and secondary levels.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 223



At last someone had the courage and thoughtfulness to forthrightly tell, albeit, warn the
parents and the ruling junta what disastrous results will follow from feeding the
younger generation on falsehoods, half-truths, slogans, statements tailored to the needs
of the martial law regimes and stuff cooked up by faceless panels of writers selling their
consciences for the promotion of the designs and short-sighted policies of military
regimes.

The cumulative effect of these shoddy textbooks, as summed up by Mr. Aziz, is
horrifying and stunning. The inbreeding's from these repetitive, incoherent and
subjective books compulsorily prescribed in all schools and colleges of the country
generate hypocrites, blindfolded zealots, fundamentalists, intriguers, timeservers and
ignoramuses with the highest degrees. Can the nation afford to consign basic education
permanently to the vagaries, expediencies and biases of the martial law regimes?

To wake up the bulk of our uneducated parliamentarians, teachers caught in the race
for commercialism and tuitions subverting the educational system and, above all, to
educate the baffled parents, someone should come forward and collect these articles in
the form of a pamphlet, both tin Urdu and English, and circulate it widely before
constituting a national committee, with Mr. Aziz as the chairman, to probe into the
matter and immediately initiate wide-ranging reforms.

I repeal that there has been a simmering against these poorly and hastily written books
over the past 25 years, but never has an onslaught been so well-expressed, so incisive
and so concrete as the series produced by Mr. Aziz.

I wish Mr. Aziz could issue a corrigenda for the plethora of mistakes and mis-
statements he has so diligently compiled, because the authors would not know the
correct answers themselves, and this burden of the martial law will continue to be
carried by our textbook boards. God knows for how long.

As a teacher of science I know what monstrosities and plagiarisms have been
committed in this country in the fair name of the modernization of science textbooks.
Most of our science textbooks, right up to intermediate and B.Sc., are wholesale
reproductions of discarded American and British books, and the mistakes in these have
persisted over the past 22 years. Perhaps I will someday muster courage to follow the
example of Mr. Aziz and set the record straight for the prescribed textbooks.

"Rahnaward": 27 May 1992

I have studied the series of articles written most diligently and painstakingly by
historian and venerable teacher Dr. K. K. Aziz (FP, April 17 to May 4). I have been able
to understand the errors pointed out by the learned historian in the prescribed
school/college textbooks which have appeared during the last 12 years and fully share

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 224



his compassion over the national degeneration on account of their myopic and
obscurantist approach.

But on one point I feel rather confused, i.e., the revolt of 1857. No doubt Dr. K.K. Aziz is
correct, but my problem is that I should comprehend the idea. Right from article II to
article X. the statement "the 1857 events were a War of Independence" is labeled as
erroneous. In article X, the learned historian has classified "the revolt of 1857 was a War
of Independence or the first War of Independence" as an ignorant, biased and confusing
assertion.

To write the history of "national defeat and humiliation" is a very tortuous exercise. The
sense of national humiliation disfigures the national psyche. The events of 1857 was not
the first War of Independence. In the perspective of world history it was a war of
resistance against foreign domination. it was saying "no" to subjugation by the Indian
people. It was started with the battle of Plassey and with glorious landmarks of Haider
Ali and Tipu and 1857 it reached a climax in 1947 and is still going on.

The British rule in India was not a national government. The British were imperialists
and what else could the revolt against them be, if not "War of Independence"? The
position of descendants of Taimur (erroneously called Mughal by British historians)
was not identical with the British. From the very beginning, the British had no intention
of settling down in India, whereas the Mughals assimilated in Hindu society and
Persianized it.

In the first half of 19th century India was feudal. There was no idea of western type
political parties. Therefore, the success of the revolt would have resulted in the
restoration of Mughal Court at Delhi. At that time Muslims or Hindus could have no
idea of national liberation movements on the 20th century pattern.

Here I venture to quote a sentence from the book titled Britain and Muslim India by Mr.
K.K. Aziz:

"They (Indians) witnessed the departure of the East India Company through the haze of
their frustration at losing the "War of Independence", and their sullenness was only
aggravated by the thought that the British had now come to stay", (p. 24). Perhaps here
the learned author has been compelled with a bit of cynicism to express the events in
popular parlance.

Had the British not occupied India, the evolution of society would have taken place on
quite a different pattern. No doubt our history books reflect a contradiction when they
request [sic.] the same events as a "Revolt" and 'War of Independence. Therefore, as a
student of history I deserve to be enlightened by Dr. Aziz on the subject.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 225



M. Iqbal Malik: 21 June 1992

You need to be congratulated for rendering yeoman's service in publishing historian
K.K. Aziz's views (FP, April 17-May 9 and June 12, 15). He should be complimented for
the courage of his convictions.

He, however, has omitted some obvious facts which would allow readers to see 1930
Allahabad address in true perspective without any difficulty. That fact is that Muslim
League Session of 1930 was called simply to lend support to the All Parties Muslim
Conference resolution passed on 1-1-29.

Allama Iqbal in his historic address said, "I have no doubt that this House will
emphatically endorse the Muslim demands embodied in this resolution (1-1-29).
Personally, I would go further than the demands embodied in it. I would like to see the
Punjab. NWFP, Sindh and Baluchistan amalgamated into a single state ... The proposal
was put forward before the Nehru Committee. They rejected it on the ground that, if
carried into effect, it would give [sic.] a very unwieldy state. This is true so far as the
area is concerned ... The exclusion of Ambala and perhaps of some districts where non-
Muslims predominate, will make it less extensive and more Muslim in population ..."

Allama Iqbal on his own only proposed partition of the Punjab. It is abundantly clear
that Allana Iqbal merely expressed liking for the proposal placed before the Nehru
Committee. This proposal was originally (talking of only political leaders) made by late
Maulana Shaukat Ali submitted it to the Nehru Committee (Zinda road, pp. 323 and
386).

With regard to the proposal and its rejection by the Nehru Committee, the Report says
... [here follows a long discussion on Iqbal, which is not relevant to the subject of
textbooks. Then he continues].

The above quoted letter of Allama Iqbal is repeatedly held forth to prove that Allama
Iqbal had selected Quaid-i-Azam to lead Muslims. Director of Iqbal Academy says (p.
16 of Dimensions of Iqbal), "One thing more. It was Allama Iqbal who called upon the
Quaid-i-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah to lead the Muslims of India to their cherished
goal. He preferred Quaid-i-Azam to all other Muslim leaders."

The Director then quotes Allama Iqbals letter on 21st June. I most respectfully say that
Allama Iqbal of blessed memory had to write this because Quaid-i-Azam did not show
interest in corresponding with Allama and the meeting requested by Allama did not
take place. Quaid-i-Azam replied only two of the 13 letters (dated 28-5-37 and 21-6-37).

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 226



Textbooks, on the other hand, have no qualm in attempting to show that Quaid-i-Azam
was politically a tenant at will of Allama Iqbal who after laying plans for establishment
of a state conferred leadership of Muslims on Quaid-i-Azam (may Allah bless him).

A textbook article on the life of Quaid-i-Azam profusely praises Iqbal who is credited to
have mainly played up (uch-chala) the themes of Iqbal and that Iqbal wrote him a letter
to persuade Quaid-i-Azam to return to India and that other leaders were not worthy of
trust.

No government agency, not even the powerful Wafaqi Mohtasib has taken cognizance
of the blasphemous writing (Qawaid-i-Insha Urdu for Class X). Quaid-i-Azam's own
letters to late Choudhry Abdul Matin are conveniently ignored. No efforts are spared
by Iqbal Academy to belittle Quaid-i-Azam to upgrade Allama Iqbal as prescient
politician.

Quaid-i-Azam is not spared even on 11th September and 25th December articles. One of
these articles was read and published during Quaid-i-Azam's centenary celebrations.

Who will expurgate the blasphemous writings; sanctity of the sacred Pakistan freedom
movement is holier than any individual. Let us save Quaid-i-Azam to save Pakistan.

Murder of History in Pakistan; Copyright © www.sanipanhwar.com 227