
I
THE ORIGINS OF PAKISTAN

Pakistan has been precariously balanced between past and present,
between tradition and modernity, between Islamism and secularism
throughout its brief history. A product of the age of European
imperialism, the country emerged as an independent state with a
relatively forward-looking outlook that was essentially the vision
of Mohammad Ali Jinnah. Jinnah, respectfully referred to as the
“Quaid-i-Azam” (Great Leader), represented the modern Muslim
man of his generation. A figure comfortable in the ways and dress
of the European colonizers, Jinnah was an English-trained
barrister and one of British India’s more successful lawyers.
Riveted by the English common law, he found its teachings the
rock bed of a civilized society. Moreover, as a Muslim of liberal
persuasion, Jinnah was convinced that the secular legal tradition
he proclaimed as his own was the sine qua non in the building of a
modern community. Motivated by a deep sense of history, Jinnah
concluded early in his life that the British would one day depart
from India and leave the management of the country to its native
population. Therefore, he was all the more convinced of the need
to bridge deep and abiding differences between the major religious
and cultural communities, especially the Hindu and Muslim.

All of Jinnah’s talent and energy in the first half of his life was
devoted to the building of a foundation that was centered on an
accommodation between Hindus and Muslims. Himself a student

1



2 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

of liberal Hindu thinkers, Jinnah shied away from exclusive
Muslim ritual and found in the eclectic human experience the
central idea that forecast the melding of peoples irrespective of
their separate and distinct traditions and culture. Fervently
committed to the intertwining of communities, Jinnah became
an active member of the Indian National Congress and labored
toward the goal of Hindu–Muslim amity and cooperation. Not
oblivious to the pulls of his Islamic faith, or to the great cultural
gaps that separated the monotheistic Muslim from the idol-
worshipping Hindu, Jinnah nevertheless strove to create the
political and legal conditions that promised a stable and
cooperative relationship between members of different religious
traditions and practices.

Like other prominent leaders of his generation, Jinnah was born
into the age of self-determination, a period wherein peoples long
under alien rule would assert their right to administer their own
affairs. Self-determination, like so many other forces that
influenced the course of events in the subcontinent, had emerged
from Western experience. Self-determination was the promise as
well as the vehicle to the realization of national ambitions. It also
meant there would be no returning to the conditions prevailing
before the British conquest of India. The Mughal Empire would
not be resurrected, nor would Indian Hindus reclaim their Maurya
and Gupta experiences. The twentieth century beckoned the
formation of the nation-state, and India could not avoid its destiny
as a contemporary member of the family of nations.

Jinnah was one of a number of Indian luminaries to project a
life experience anchored on secular ideas and philosophy. But
more than other Muslims of his day he was able to articulate the
meaning and importance of social coalescence. Muslim competitors
for political leadership were numerous, but their postures were
more limited, their declarations more circumspect, and their
pronounced objectives more aggressively expressed. Jinnah stood
out from these other major Muslim actors and their movements.
Furthermore, he embraced the totality of the subcontinent. He
identified with no particular region and he reached out to anyone
wishing to associate with a more positive and constructive
outlook. In the years before World War I, Jinnah did not
considerhimself a spokesman for Muslims alone. He believed the



The Origins of Pakistan 3

time had arrived for Indian leaders to speak rationally and
objectively to all the people of India.

Mahatma Gandhi was a great boost to the self-government
movement launched by the Indian National Congress following
the Great War. Returning to India from South Africa shortly after
the onset of hostilities in Europe, Gandhi epitomized the Indian
quest for shared governance. Unlike Jinnah, however, Gandhi,
although also a barrister in the English tradition, was less
concerned with the rule of law. Gandhi’s success was not within
the confines of the courtroom but in rallying the multitudes
against colonial authority. His street tactics, notably his several
passive resistance campaigns, in fact involved challenging and
undermining existing colonial law. Moreover, the Mahatma’s
appeal was aimed directly at the subcontinent’s illiterate or semi-
educated population, which he mobilized to pressure the British in
every public venue. Jinnah, by contrast, had addressed his appeal
to the literati, to educated Indian leaders who understood his
sophisticated idiom and acknowledged the need to educate their
followers in the manners of modernity. Gandhi was less interested
in laying a legal foundation for the reconciliation of disparate
communities than he was in leading a huge popular movement
against British rule.

Gandhi knew what he was against more than what he was for.
He related more to the impoverished multitude, notably among
the Hindus, who found purpose for their lives as well as common
cause in the struggle for national freedom. Jinnah’s more
aristocratic approach was exaggerated by Gandhi’s earthy, popular,
and soon worldwide persona, and Jinnah was virtually unknown
outside British India. Moreover, the popular media dramatized
Gandhi’s every action and they recorded his determined, often
personalized efforts (for example, his many fasting episodes) to
embarrass colonial authority. Jinnah’s more elegant style evoked no
such attention and he found himself in a zero-sum game with the
Mahatma that he was destined to lose. Distressed by the failure
of his reserved strategy, Jinnah retired from the political contest in
the late 1920s and sought refuge in England. In so doing, he left the
self-determination struggle to Mahatma Gandhi and the Congress
Party. Jinnah found solace in the sedate English surroundings that
had nurtured his early manhood, but he knew he had left the future



4 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

of the subcontinent to be shaped by a frail man clad in a loincloth
and carrying little more than a walking stick.

Jinnah and Gandhi and the struggle for a secular state

The Muslim League was organized in Dacca in 1906 as an
immediate reaction to events in Bengal that had witnessed the
formation of what was to be a short-lived Muslim-dominant
province. In larger measure, the expansion of Muslim League
influence was a direct response by concerned Indian Muslim
leaders to the growing importance of political organizations such
as the Indian National Congress, but even more so to the
emergence of militant Hinduism. The Hindu Mahasabha violently
opposed the Bengal partition and played a singular role in forcing
the British to rescind their earlier order. Arguing against the
formation of a Muslim-dominant province, the Mahasabha had
launched a campaign of terror that took its toll of the innocent
and enflamed communal passions. The Indian National Congress
did little to thwart or condemn the perpetrators of social disorder
in Bengal, and the Muslim League became further convinced of its
need to speak for all of India’s endangered Muslims.

Jinnah, without abandoning his membership in the Congress,
joined the Muslim League in 1913 in a display of Muslim
solidarity, but his instincts were aimed at identifying moderates in
both parties who, like himself, wished to neutralize the extremists.
Mindful of the prevailing bitterness between Hindus and Muslims,
as well as their capacity for displays of uncontrolled violence,
Jinnah saw no other option than for men and women of reason
and education to stand, if necessary, with the colonial authority in
the maintenance of law and order. Citing the prevailing conditions
and the difficulties in restraining pent-up animosities, Jinnah
forcefully opposed both Hindu and Muslim demagogues but saved
his speechmaking and bridge building for the more erudite leaders
who were demanding a share in the governance of India. For his
consistency of effort and level-headed behavior Jinnah won the
appellation “Ambassador of Unity” from both Hindus and
Muslims.

The Lucknow Pact of 1916 was heralded as promoting Hindu–
Muslim amity within the subcontinent. Fashioned and managed



The Origins of Pakistan 5

by Jinnah, the agreement between the Indian National Congress
and the All-India Muslim League declared it the intention of both
organizations to work toward common goals. Both eschewed
violence and promoted the tranquility of India as fervently as they
pursued shared government status with the colonial authority. The
“Memorandum of the Nineteen,” calling for a substantial measure
of self-government, that was presented to the Viceroy’s council by
Hindu and Muslim notables was acknowledged to have been
drafted at Jinnah’s initiative. These moments would be recorded as
the high point in Congress–Muslim-League cooperation.

An enormous British Indian army had been raised for battle in
Europe during World War I. Thousands of Indians died in the
trenches in France and Belgium, and an even greater number were
wounded in the service of the Empire. Britain had promised its
Indian subjects a degree of self-government in return for their war
service, and the leaders of the political parties had reason to expect
that pledge would be honored. British policy after the war,
however, also sought to muffle opposition to British authority, and
in 1919 this had resulted in the passing of anti-sedition acts.
Instead of being granted more rights, Indians found themselves
constrained and even oppressed under a colonial action known as
the Rowlatt Act.

Jinnah saw Gandhi as chiefly responsible for this turn of events.
Gandhi had returned to India in 1915 and had quickly moved to
the forefront of the Congress movement. Hardly a year after the
signing of the Lucknow Pact, the Mahatma introduced his
satyagraha campaign of passive resistance, a mass movement that
enlisted the poorest of India’s peasants to oppose the British
planter class. Arrested and jailed, Gandhi’s popularity soared as he
polished his program of open defiance to colonial authority.
Gandhi symbols and actions appealed to essentially Hindu
religious sensibilities and left the Muslim leaders wondering how
they fitted into the larger scheme of independence. Jinnah was
particularly distressed, having invested so much in the more
secular argument that he hoped would nullify the influence of
particularistic, and especially the more militant, religiously
directed interest groups like the Hindu Mahasabha.

Gandhi, however, had captured the imagination of people far
and wide. He was acknowledged as the leader of the spreading



6 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

anti-imperialist struggle. Gandhi also challenged the might of the
British-inspired industrial class. Moreover, Gandhi’s preaching of
non-violence did not prevent his followers from disrupting the
colonial economy or closing down India’s industrial centers. Labor
strikes focused attention on poor working conditions, on long
working hours for little pay, and on overbearing management that
was indifferent to the plight of their workers. Work stoppages that
lasted more than a year occurred in all the major cities. Sustained
unrest and a variety of mob actions led directly to the Rowlatt Act
of 1919. Rowlatt was aimed at containing the disturbances, but it
had quite the opposite effect. Mass protests against the Act were
immediate and widespread and virtually paralyzed the entire
colony. Moreover, coming as it did, just months after the end of
World War I, the Rowlatt Act was hardly what Indians anticipated
after their contribution to the war effort.

The quest for Hindu–Muslim amity was swallowed up in the
events that followed. Gandhi rejected Jinnah’s accommodative
strategy, asserting it served colonial interests, and a few short years
after his return from South Africa the Mahatma turned India away
from a more deliberate and patient course to one more
revolutionary and bombastic. Gandhi addressed the issues of
passive resistance, of ahimsa and non-violence, but he had enlisted
the multitudes in his campaign and his mass movement unleashed
intense bitterness against British authority. Jinnah could only look
on with foreboding, seeing his dream for a transitional and
methodical transfer of power dashed even before it had been set in
train. The British crackdown on the Gandhi led and inspired
demonstrations was forceful and crude, such as in the notorious
Jalianwalabagh massacre.

Jinnah condemned Gandhi’s tactics, but at the 1920 Nagpur
session of the Indian National Congress, his was the only dissident
voice against the Gandhian policy of non-cooperation. It now was
apparent to Jinnah that the Congress no longer reflected the ideals
of the liberal Congress leader Gopal Krishna Gokhale, who had
died almost six years earlier. Gandhi, Jinnah argued, was leading
India down the wrong channel, and was feeding the frenzy of the
uninformed and emotional segments of the Indian population. By
contrast, Jinnah believed the masses needed more deliberate
leaders. Political education, he opined, would require years not



The Origins of Pakistan 7

months. If “Home Rule” were to be a positive experience, it must
begin with a workable structure of governance that could be
embraced by all those considered agents of change. In Jinnah’s
opinion, Gandhi’s resurrection of traditional Hindu symbols could
mobilize and energize but they could not prepare the people for
responsible self-government.

Gandhi’s objective was to outmaneuver and isolate Jinnah.
Moreover, Gandhi had already extended his hand to the Muslims
of the subcontinent distressed over the World War I defeat of the
Ottoman Empire. The occupation of the Sublime Porte at
Constantinople, site of the Islamic Caliphate, by combined
European forces caused major distress among Indian Muslims.
Arguing that he spoke for Muslims as well as Hindus, the
Mahatma condemned the actions of the European imperialists, and
in particular the British. Gandhi used the occasion to denounce the
Montagu–Chelmsford Reforms that promised a degree of self-
government. He was also critical of the Government of India Act of
1919, calling it little more than a colonial ruse aimed at sustaining
the Empire. The dyarchy aspects of the 1919 Act gave the British
Viceroy veto power over indigenous decision making and Gandhi
decried the entire episode as a sham perpetrated by shameless
opportunists. Gandhi never believed himself more justified in
rallying the masses. His bona fides intact as a leader of all Indians,
Gandhi also played a prominent role in the Caliphate Movement
that Indian Muslims had organized with the goal of freeing the
Ottoman Sultan/Caliph from European bondage. Gandhi’s call was
to the subcontinent’s Muslims to give up their domicile and
possessions in India. He urged them to do battle with the
“heathen” that threatened Islam’s holy places in the Arabian
Peninsula and had made a captive of the Caliph of Islam. Gandhi’s
association with a key Muslim cause met with a positive response
from tens of thousands of India’s Islamic faithful. It also was meant
to make him more popular with Muslims than Mohammad Ali
Jinnah.

Jinnah had stood in opposition to the Caliphate Movement,
which he argued was full of false promises. He saw Gandhi’s
tactics as deceptive and designed to deflect Muslims from the real
issues. He also accused Gandhi and the Caliphate organizers of
misleading an ignorant but emotionally charged people. So



8 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

incensed was he that Muslims were being led astray by
unscrupulous plotters within the Congress Party that he used this
opportunity to quit his long-standing membership in the Indian
National Congress. Jinnah shifted his own actions to mirror those
of Gandhi. Long a proponent of open and fair elections, Jinnah
had supported the competitive nature of elections and been critical
of elections along communal lines. Now, however, he was prepared
to adopt the 1909 Morley–Minto Reforms that called for separate
electorates for the different religious communities. Jinnah’s
justification for this about-face was his disgust with the Gandhi-
led self-rule strategy. Still a believer in the secular dimensions of
national unity, Jinnah nevertheless was persuaded to address the
more narrowly expressed Muslim causes. Events forced Jinnah to
ponder the ineluctable and multiethnic character of Indian society.
It was the beginning of a thought process that would lead
inevitably to the articulation of his “two-nation theory,” and the
later justification for the creation of an independent Muslim state.
Jinnah, however, had not yet given up the idea of a unified India
nurtured by a developing civil society.

Once a secretary to Dadabhai Naoroji, a founder of the
Congress Party, Jinnah was deeply committed to constitutional
principles, and showed particular reverence for the legal process.
He also condemned mass movements and street demonstrations,
arguing they produced nothing in the way of meaningful change.
His association with the Hindu militant and extremist B.J. Tilak,
whom he represented in open court, centered on his affection for
the law. His attachment to G.K. Gokhale, perhaps the staunchest
believer in English liberalism, convinced him that goodwill and
common cause could achieve impossible goals. Despite obvious
differences between Hindus and Muslims, Jinnah was not swayed
from the belief that, with good faith, Indian leaders of opposed
persuasions could guide their followers along a common path of
social progress and reform. Jinnah’s essential goal remained the
nurturing of a polity along democratic lines. This meant weaning
the illiterate masses from the religious obscurantism so illustrated
by the subcontinent’s caste-ridden society and sectarian clashes.
The evolution of the secular state was the sine qua non in the
realization of a modern India, and for Jinnah the process could not
be rushed, nor the British contribution ignored.



The Origins of Pakistan 9

Jinnah’s task was not only to inject a modicum of contemplation
into the struggle for freedom; he had to convince members of the
Muslim League that their patience and fortitude in the face of
Gandhi’s provocative actions were absolute requirements. Jinnah
recognized a pressing need to learn the ways of modern self-
government, and only the British example offered that experience.
Gandhi’s boycotting of the colonial councils had limited exposure
to the nuances of contemporary administration. What Gandhi
preached and taught was not constitutional limitations on the uses
of power but rebellion and the rejection of authority. For Jinnah,
therefore, mob rule was especially frightening. How might a
polyglot, largely poor, and illiterate society find equilibrium when
the British departed the scene? Without that balancing force,
Muslims, Sikhs, Hindus, and others would be left to their own
devices; and, without an appropriate understanding of the give
and take of politics, how were the many nations that called India
their home to find peace and harmony?

Jinnah’s commitment to the rule of law informed him that only
a legal structure, familiar and acceptable to the vast and diverse
majority, offered the promise of an India renewed through
democratic tradition. Neither Hinduism, nor Islam, nor Sikhism,
nor any other strongly held faith was organized along lines
conducive to progressive change. India would build its future
along lines that allowed for the assimilation of all groups, large
and small, or the subcontinent would shatter into its many
divisions. Mere contemplation of such a consequence was too
horrific to ignore. Jinnah therefore was forced to conclude that
Gandhi’s tactics could not go unchallenged.

Jinnah, however, could not do battle with the international
media that were mesmerized by Gandhi’s personality. The likes
of Mahatma Gandhi had never been seen before. In the heyday of
empire, the picture of a small, gaunt man, armed only with a
walking stick, doing battle with the great British Empire was
a story to be told. Sensational journalism had begun to emerge
toward the end of the nineteenth century and it flowered after
World War I. Gandhi was an intriguing character whose activities
were documented in significant detail by the world press. Radio
was in its infancy, but Gandhi’s voice could be magnified in the
most unlikely places. Moreover, the nascent movie industry was



10 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

nurtured on short subjects and the early newsreels often depicted
the Mahatma in many of his numerous ministrations. Thus,
people in distant places may have known little about the more
specific struggle for Indian freedom, but they quickly formed
opinions about M.K. Gandhi. Gandhi’s stubbornness had become
so celebrated via the media that his very manner worked its way
into common speech. It was not uncommon for children, defying
their parents’ authority, to be accused of acting like “Mahatma
Gandhi.” Having entered the popular consciousness, Gandhi had
become a worldwide phenomenon as well as a symbol of popular
resistance.

Gandhi’s speeches and exploits were recorded by some of the
most eminent American and European journalists and photo-
graphers of the period. By contrast, Jinnah received almost no
attention outside the subcontinent. His cause was at best ignored.
His actions too often led to the conclusion that he was little more
than a lackey of colonial authority. Indeed, even among Muslims,
notably those with dominant roles in the many different regions of
the subcontinent, Jinnah was seen as either a threat or a nuisance.
Regional leaders and virtual potentates had gained strength as a
consequence of the Government of India Act of 1919. Power had
devolved to the many local communities and authority was
already well established within them when Gandhi emerged to
lead the Home Rule campaign. Many Muslim leaders identified
with Gandhi and the Congress Party. By contrast, they saw little
connection between themselves and a Muslim League dominated
by Mohammad Ali Jinnah.

Gandhi’s campaign against the British colonial system could not
be derailed. The Mahatma had taken control of the Home Rule
League and had turned it into the Swaraj or freedom movement.
Sidelined by these events, Jinnah took little part in political affairs
in the early 1920s, or even after his election to the Central
Legislative Assembly in 1923. Continuing his campaign for
Muslim–Hindu unity, he received little attention and less interest
from the Indian National Congress, now thoroughly a nationalist
organization. In 1925, Jinnah assumed a role on the committee
concerned with the Indianization of the colonial army and the
establishment of a military training college in India similar to
that of Sandhurst in Great Britain. Jinnah visited Britain to study



The Origins of Pakistan 11

first-hand the needs of such an institution, and on returning to
India he was again elected to the Central Legislative Assembly.
Jinnah labored in the cause of fair Muslim representation in any
future constitutional system but still he received little if any
attention from his counterparts in the Congress. In 1928, Sir John
Simon led a group of parliamentarians to India to advise on
subsequent reforms regarding self-government, but Jinnah saw
little coming from their visit and shortly after the group’s arrival
he left India for England.

A despondent Jinnah took up domicile in the country that
nurtured his intellectual soul, and there was little evidence he
would ever return to India. Before his departure Jinnah had had
one more major confrontation with Gandhi and the Congress at
the Calcutta All-Parties Conference. Pleading for consideration
of Muslim sensibilities, Jinnah warned the Congress leaders that
ignoring minimum Muslim demands for representation in a future
Indian government would have disastrous consequences. The
Moltilal Nehru Report was before the conference during this
confrontation and Jinnah noted its flawed framework in not giving
appropriate recognition to the more than one hundred million
Muslims residing within the country. In the end, however, all his
demands and suggestions were rejected. Jinnah, in fact, faced
verbal attacks from some of the conferees. It was made clear that
they thought he neither represented the Muslims of India nor had
the right to speak for them. It is reported that his sense of loss was
so deep that he left the session without uttering another word.
Jinnah could only conclude that he had witnessed more than the
death of Hindu–Muslim unity. While he was in this state of
depression Jinnah’s young wife, only twenty-nine years old, died
after a long illness.

One more activity, however, drew Jinnah’s attention before he
abandoned the political world altogether. Condemning the Simon
Commission, Jinnah called upon the new British Prime Minister,
Ramsay MacDonald, to assemble a conference in London so that
India’s political representatives could meet with British officials to
discuss the future of India. The Round Table Conference of 1930
was a direct consequence of this action and Jinnah was one of
fifty-eight delegates representing the subcontinent. Gandhi chose
not to attend. The Aga Khan led the Muslim delegation and



12 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Jinnah was appropriately respectful of his leadership. Lasting
several weeks, the Round Table succeeded in establishing the
principle of self-government for all of India’s people, but further
discussion was needed. Hence the decision was taken to assemble
again some time in 1931. Jinnah remained in England when the
conference ended and assumed the life of a barrister before the
Privy Council Bar. His sister, Fatima, whom he had guided in her
educational pursuits, joined him in London, and the two siblings
became inseparable from that day forward. Miss Jinnah, as she
was known, had left a dental practice to be with her brother. She
became his principal confidante for the remainder of his life.

The second Round Table Conference convened in London in
1931. This time Gandhi attended, sensing something of importance
might emerge that required his reaction. The British representatives
addressed the issue of minority rights in an independent India and
argued the need to resolve the communal problem before self-
government was achieved. This was not what the Mahatma
wanted to hear. Believing Britain was deliberately delaying the
proceedings, the Congress delegation accused Whitehall of
continuing its “divide and rule” policy by placating the Muslims.
Seeing that the British Prime Minister presided over the minorities
committee, and that the Aga Khan also was a prominent
committee member chosen by the British, Gandhi lashed out
against the colonial hypothesis that only a resolution of the
Hindu–Muslim question could move the subcontinent toward
independence. Gandhi insisted on the reverse order. He argued for
the earliest British withdrawal so that the different communities
could be free to find their own formula for social harmony. After
one side’s demands were rejected by the other, and after four
difficult months of inconclusive wrangling, Gandhi abruptly left
the conference and returned to India. The Round Table Conference
dragged on another six months without resolving anything, and
the only agreement was a general call for another session some
time in 1932 or 1933. That conference never materialized.

Gandhi returned to India disgruntled and empty-handed. Civil
disobedience was renewed, and strikes and protest meetings again
paralyzed the country. The British government answered the
demonstrators with even more repressive measures than earlier.
Gandhi was again arrested. A Congress Party meeting was banned



The Origins of Pakistan 13

by the authorities and many Congress delegates were imprisoned.
Jinnah observed the sustained conflict in India from his retreat in
England, noting that it was a predictable outcome of the Round
Table failure. Gandhi’s appeal to the Hindu untouchables grew
during this period. So too his effort at reaching out to the
Christian community. It was also during this sequence that the
violence-prone peasant movement spread to include the Indian
south. Gandhi insisted on wearing the anti-feudal mantle, and his
verbal attack on the landlord class won him still more adherents.
So too his call for provincial autonomy gained the fancy of the
Muslims in the North West Frontier. Followers of Abdul Ghaffar
Khan found common cause with Gandhi, who had even
demonstrated sympathy with the Khudai Khidmatgar’s secessionist
Pakhtunistan Movement.

Ghaffar Khan publicly announced his alliance with Gandhi.
Their cooperative endeavor was also a sign that Hindus and
Muslims could find common ground and that opposing British rule
was at the heart of their joint struggle. Jinnah’s tactics, it was said,
were more about “divide and rule” than true unity. So intimate was
the relationship forged by Gandhi and Ghaffar Khan that it was not
long before the latter was being referred to as the “Frontier
Gandhi.” Alliances such as this one with the tribal Pushtuns placed
the Congress firmly on the Afghan frontier, and in position to
influence the Afghan monarchy in Kabul, which also had a vendetta
against the British. The Muslim League had few supporters among
the Pushtuns and Afghans, and Gandhi’s tactics centered on
neutralizing the League’s claim to speak for all of the subcontinent’s
Muslims. Similar Congress activities penetrated the Muslim-
dominant Punjab, where opposition to the Muslim League was
nurtured by Congress support for the growing provincial Unionist
Party. By the early 1930s, Jinnah, from his self-imposed exile in
England, was forced to acknowledge that his quest for a unified,
independent India, comfortable with constitutional principles as
well as social and political pluralism, had to be abandoned.

The emergence of the Pakistan movement

Mohammad Iqbal is credited with the first serious reference to an
independent Muslim state in the subcontinent. An acknowledged



14 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

philosopher and poet, Iqbal cited the need for a separate Muslim
homeland at the 1930 meeting of the Muslim League. Associated
with Jinnah and moved by his legal and political work, Iqbal
nevertheless questioned Jinnah’s insistence on the unity of India.
Iqbal’s reasoning was simple. The Muslims had suffered ignominy
following the abolition of the Mughal system in the nineteenth
century, and British rule had revived the Hindus, who subsequently
had organized themselves into a formidable political force.
Moreover, Hindus had taken advantage of British offers of
English education and had achieved considerable station within
the colonial government. Muslim refusal to follow the Hindu
example had caused the community to lose position in the colonial
regime and by the twentieth century the economic and political
gap between Hindus and Muslims had widened appreciably.

Arguing that neither the British formula nor the Jinnah notion
of unity could lead to anything but civil war, Iqbal proposed the
formation of a Muslim state to be forged from the Punjab, North
West Frontier Province and the territories of Sind and Balochistan.
Iqbal discussed his ideas with Jinnah during the latter’s domicile in
England but in the end they agreed to disagree. Moreover, Jinnah
saw the issue of a separate Muslim state in the northwestern region
of the subcontinent as a non-starter. Gandhi was the driving force
in the effort to dislodge the British and he and the Congress Party
were hardly prepared to yield to Iqbal’s demand any more than
they would adopt Jinnah’s vision. Moreover, Congress alliances
with the Khudai Khidmatgar in the North West Frontier Province
and the Unionists in the Punjab had left the Muslim League with
little leverage in those regions. Jinnah cautioned Iqbal not to
provoke a war between Muslims, or else even the more limited
gains obtained under British rule could be lost.

Jinnah acknowledged Iqbal’s sentiments and understood the
source of his philosophy. Still, he was inclined to look at the
practical aspects of the Muslim problem and he could not envision
a viable Muslim state as described by the renowned poet.
Balochistan was still a wild, arid border region and Sindh had
not yet been split off from the Bombay presidency. The North West
Frontier Province was a rugged mountain area along the Afghan
border, its inhabitants largely tribal, and, with the exception of a
limited settled area around Peshawar, it was subject to no known



The Origins of Pakistan 15

central authority. Only the Punjab represented the contemporary
world of South Asia and there the Muslims had to find communion
with the Sikhs in addition to the resident Hindus. The more Jinnah
pondered the idea of an independent Muslim nation comprised
from such a mixture, the more he was convinced that his quest for
national unity was the only option when the British left India.
Indeed, Jinnah raised the issue of the remaining Muslim population
inhabiting the subcontinent. Far more numerous then their
brethren in the northwest, the Muslims of the Ganges plain
extending into the eastern province of Bengal also needed to be
factored into the thinking of those who would partition the
subcontinent between Hindu and Muslim. Tens of millions of
Muslims could not be ignored. Nor could they be accommodated
within Iqbal’s “independent” Muslim state. Struggle as he would
with the notion of a Muslim majority state, Jinnah returned again
and again to the need for a constitutional arrangement that would
guarantee the interests of all the people of the subcontinent.

Jinnah assumed the life of an English gentleman, watched over
by his sister. He endeavored to put the subcontinent behind him.
In July 1933, however, the subcontinent appeared at his door in
the person of Nawabzada Liaquat Ali Khan, a leader of the
Muslim League whose residence in Delhi had doubled as the
headquarters of the party. A graduate of Aligarh and Oxford, and
a lawyer by training, Liaquat had turned to politics on a full-time
basis after returning to India. Jinnah had only met Liaquat in
1928, when he was subjected to the stings of his detractors at the
Calcutta Congress. Liaquat, twenty years Jinnah’s junior, was
impressed with his stolid and firm performance in the face of the
harshest opposition. Liaquat had singled Jinnah out as the only
one capable of reorganizing and breathing life into a deeply
wounded Muslim League. Liaquat informed Jinnah that Gandhi
had aroused the Hindu masses and had virtually no opposition in
pressing his campaign. Muslims, he noted, had a greater sense of
danger than ever before. Liaquat made convincing argument that
the times called for an exceptional leader who could embrace the
diversity of the subcontinent’s Muslims. He insisted the only
person fitting that role was Mohammad Ali Jinnah.

Reluctant to cut his ties to England but moved by Liaquat’s
plea, Jinnah agreed to return to India to see for himself if the



16 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Muslims who claimed to need his leadership really wanted it.
Liaquat did his homework before Jinnah’s arrival, and arranged
for a number of Muslim leaders to meet with him when he
returned to India. Jinnah was moved by the positive reception, and
sensed a new opportunity to reintroduce his thinking into the
political scene. Gandhi’s profile dominated the subcontinent and
only a substantial Muslim personality could attract the attention
of the millions of uncommitted Muslims. Only Jinnah was capable
of straddling the Muslims of western and eastern India. Jinnah
questioned his personal capacity, refused to yield to flattery, but in
the end was prepared to assume the role destiny had again thrust
in his path. Jinnah counseled his colleagues that the road would be
difficult, but that if they worked together the Muslim League
might yet take its place alongside the Indian National Congress.

Jinnah returned to England to terminate his practice before the
Privy Council and to sell his home. In January 1935, he returned
to India with his sister and took up the charge given him by the
members of the Muslim League. The timing of his arrival in India
was in large part a consequence of the King’s Royal Assent to the
Government of India Act of 1935 that granted more self-
government. The Act signified a decline in British power and
seemed to point to the future independence of India. It devolved
more powers to the indigenous population, and eliminated
dyarchy, but the center maintained special powers that were
aimed at protecting the public peace. Federation was made the
preferred structure for a unified India, but the many princely
states, sensing their demise, rejected the arrangement. The number
of Indian provinces increased to eleven and, in the Communal
Award, India’s minority population were apportioned seats in
separate communal electorates. Moreover, no provincial ministry
could prevent ministers being named from the minority parties.

Jinnah was not in agreement with the Award but believed it had
to be accepted it in order to build a constitutional order. To
demonstrate his desire to work the new system, Jinnah went to the
Punjab, where Muslims and Sikhs clashed over the ownership of a
mosque that had been seized by the latter community. With calm
demeanor and an appeal to legal reasoning Jinnah successfully
gained the understanding of the conflicted parties. It was his first
test under the new system and he was buoyed by the welcome both



The Origins of Pakistan 17

he and his methods received from opposed Muslim and Sikh
groups. Jinnah was therefore firm in the belief that his rational
approach was more appropriate, and he became even more
determined to challenge Gandhi’s radical strategy.

Elections were forecast to give operational meaning to the 1935
Act. Congress had not waited for the passage of the Act, but as
early as 1934 had set up a Parliamentary Board to formulate
policy and select candidates. The Muslim League, by contrast, was
slow to react and it was not until two years later that they created
a similar body. Jinnah was made president of the League’s Central
Election Board and he had the task of enlivening the party and
getting Muslims to leave their more familiar associations for
membership in the League. The major challenge was in those areas
where the Muslims were in the majority and where there was little
fear of Hindu domination. The Muslim League’s appeal would
have to center on these populations. Moreover, Jinnah was of two
minds. He believed the Muslim League was the only organization
that had any chance of uniting all the Muslims of the
subcontinent. On the other hand, he continued to believe that
an Indian polity constructed over a firm constitutional foundation
would guarantee a future India that was both united and
democratic.

The immediate question, therefore, was how to represent the
central purpose of the Muslim League when the essential goal was
a unified, independent India, not different from that said to be the
objective of the Congress Party. As already noted, the Congress
appeared to be the preference of the Muslims of the North West
Frontier Province and the Punjab. These provinces saw greater
opportunities in a non-communal party, much like the one Jinnah
had originally promoted. Adding to Jinnah’s dilemma, Sind
province was established in 1936 as a direct consequence of the
1935 Act. Its leaders also followed a course away from the
Muslim League. In fact, it was only in Bengal, the remaining
Muslim-dominant region, that Jinnah could expect a loyal
following. Jinnah’s major Muslim supporters therefore emerged
from the Hindu-dominant regions of northern India. It was in
those areas that the fear “Islam in Danger” was most pronounced.
It was also there that the dominance of the Congress Party was
most in evidence.



18 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Jinnah’s appeal to Muslims to join the League was further
tasked upon his return from exile in England. Gandhi’s passive
resistance movement was now a mighty force, and the Mahatma
was capable of shutting down the country at a single command.
Assuming the role of a mystic and following a life of extreme
asceticism, Gandhi had transferred the mundane chores of running
the Congress to disciples, notably to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the
son of Moltilal, still a young and vibrant personality in his middle
forties. Gandhi’s age was no doubt a factor in his strategy.
Believing it would be two or three years before Britain would
consider releasing its Indian colony, Gandhi could not imagine
taking the political helm of the new state. Grooming younger men
for that task was imperative, and what better opportunity than the
elections scheduled for 1937?

Jinnah made the mistake of underestimating Nehru. He also
saw the Mahatma’s action in pressing Nehru to the head of the
Congress as either a clever ruse as cover for his own pre-eminence,
or a failure of judgment. Jinnah later acknowledged his error.
Thirty million people cast ballots in the 1937 election, thirty
percent representing Muslim choices. When the votes were tallied
the Muslim League was almost eliminated as a competitive
organization. Under the separate electorate system the Muslim
League garnered no more than five percent of the Muslim votes.
By contrast, the Congress Party took control of almost all the
provincial legislatures. Nehru’s voice was heard throughout India
when he declared that there were only two parties in the country,
that is, the Indian National Congress and the British colonial
authority. Jinnah had anticipated defeat, but not on such an
ignominious scale. A weaker personality might have admitted
defeat and moved on. Moreover, the Congress victory spoke to the
issue of unity and the many Muslims who had voted for Gandhi’s
party had also demonstrated a desire for full integration. The
League’s loss was also Jinnah’s loss and the future of the communal
party, as Nehru had implied, was much in doubt.

Jinnah, however, had come too far to admit defeat. The country
had voted for the Congress, but the question regarding constitu-
tional order and a loyal opposition was still to be addressed. A
separate, independent Muslim state was not the immediate goal,
but a political organization that articulated the concerns and



The Origins of Pakistan 19

needs of Muslims was more needed than ever in the face of a
Congress monopoly. Jinnah therefore drew inspiration from defeat
and recognized the necessity of changing tactics. Jinnah decided he
would be the voice of the subcontinent’s Muslims even if the
Muslim League were not the choice of the Muslim majority.
Jinnah continued to represent the League but it was his personality
that dominated Muslim thought and actions. Jinnah sought a role
that transcended the Muslim League. He alone carried the party
and in spite of its poor showing he insisted that the League be
acknowledged as an “equal” partner with the Congress. Jinnah
never intended to match the Congress in numbers and his call for a
form of parity was more a qualitative response to the significance
of the Indian Muslim minority. Jinnah’s interpretation of events
was audacious and unexpected in light of the election results. On
the Congress side there were expressions of outrage. Nehru was
among the first to cite the arrogance of the Muslim League leader
who, though thoroughly defeated, would assume so defiant a
posture.

The Congress argued that it was the only genuine national party
and as such should control all the ministries in all the provinces.
Muslims were offered opportunities to participate but only as
Congress members, and with the understanding that the Muslim
League would be disbanded. Jinnah’s insistence that the Congress
include League members in the government was brushed aside.
Such a big winner in the elections, Congress was determined to
proceed without the Muslim League. Jinnah and his colleagues
perceived mortal danger in the Congress attitude. Everything
seemed to confirm Muslim League fears that the Congress rhetoric
stressing secularism was a mere cover for Hindu hegemony. The
Muslim League fell back on its “Islam in Danger” theme, indeed
with more justification than earlier. Jinnah was now more
determined to take up the cause of Muslim rights. According to
official Muslim League statements, the election revealed the true
Hindu machinations. Jinnah also wanted the British to know that
one hundred million Muslims had to be taken seriously no matter
how many more Hindus resided in the subcontinent.

The Congress demonstrated superior organization, but it failed
to address Muslim concerns, let alone aspirations. The moment
called for stable and efficient authority, but it also required



20 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

compassionate and sensitive leaders. Avoiding communal warfare
was the highest priority. For the Muslim League separation
seemed the only real alternative. Iqbal’s perception of a Muslim
state, carved from the Muslim majority areas of the subcontinent,
was revisited. Jinnah was compelled to entertain the idea of
partition, and the view that if it were done, it had better be done
under British colonial auspices, not as a consequence of civil war.
The campaign for an independent state was not what any of the
parties had seriously contemplated, but it was now the dominating
issue.

Gandhi and Nehru acknowledged that Jinnah was a resolute
foe. Neither side was prepared to yield, however, and their
stubborn posturing prevented the search for a workable solution.
Gandhi described Jinnah’s bellicose statements following the
League’s losses in the 1937 elections an “act of war.” Jinnah
cited Congress hysteria and its total lack of diplomacy. In this
acrimonious environment, all the principals were oblivious to the
storm clouds forming over the European continent. In 1938 the
British Prime Minister, Neville Chamberlain, journeyed to Munich
in an attempt to appease Adolf Hitler. Despite the pledges and
capitulation, however, Germany could not be satiated. In
September 1939 Germany invaded Poland, precipitating World
War II. While Gandhi and Jinnah struggled over the issue of their
independence, India suddenly found itself a belligerent in a
worldwide conflict. Congress, however, refused to be committed
to India’s participation in the war without its formal approval and
it ordered all its elected officials to quit their posts in the
provincial governments. Gandhi resurrected the non-cooperation
movement and took to the streets. Hard pressed on the war front,
Britain was called to divert resources to law and order operations
in the subcontinent.

Where the colonial authority saw increased danger, Jinnah read
opportunity in the Congress call to abandon posts in the
provincial governments. Jinnah called for celebration and declared
a “Day of Deliverance” from Hindu tyranny. He also took the
contrary position to that of the Congress and ordered his followers
to do everything in their power to support the British war
effort. Although Jinnah’s position was read as submission to
colonial power, tens of thousands of Indian Muslims heeded his



The Origins of Pakistan 21

command. Muslim League ranks swelled with new recruits, drawn
particularly from student ranks. Jinnah wasted little time in
indoctrinating the young members who soon became the vanguard
of a revitalized Muslim League. The All-India Muslim Students
Federation was a consequence of these events and branches of the
organization sprouted all over the country.

Jinnah was now broadly acclaimed the Muslim peoples’ “Great
Leader,” their Quaid-i-Azam. He also drew greater attention from
the British government. Jinnah’s declarations of support were
welcome in Whitehall and Muslim assistance in the war translated
into more serious consideration from the British Viceroy. Jinnah
turned his sights from his fruitless struggle with the Congress to
the British colonial government, recognizing that the leverage
gained at the beginning of the war could return rich dividends
when the hostilities finally ended. In 1937, a year before his death,
Iqbal had called Jinnah the only person capable of saving the
Muslims from a terrible fate. Jinnah had taken that responsibility
to heart, and his strategy in the pursuit of an independent Muslim
state now entered a critical phase.

A Government of India Amending Act passed the British
parliament after the declaration of war against Germany. This was
followed by a Defence of India Ordinance on September 3, 1939
in which the Viceroy was sanctioned the necessary power to rule
India by decree. The colonial authority declared it would not
tolerate street demonstrations or anything disturbing the public
peace. The harshest penalties were reserved for those challenging
authority and those who by their acts gave comfort and support to
the enemy. The suspension of the Indian federation followed.
Congress responded with its own declaration stating that it was
opposed to German fascism but also would not relent in its
campaign to remove the yoke of British imperialism.

Congress spokesmen insisted the 1935 election made it the voice
of the Indian nation and that it alone expressed the true sentiments
of all Indians. Indians, it was repeated, wanted no part in a
European war, and the Congress intended to press that message
worldwide. Congress, however, did not confine itself to public
statements of policy. Protest meetings degenerated into street riots,
causing numerous deaths and considerable destruction of property.
Given the intensification of civil strife, the Viceroy summoned



22 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Gandhi to demand that he call off those determined to further
destabilize the colony. The Mahatma, however, had no intention
of reducing the pressure. Given the opportunity, he repeated the
Congress policy that India refused to be committed to a war not of
its making or concern. War and peace, he counseled, must be a
matter for the Indian people to decide. The British government did
not have the right to impose a war on the nation and India’s
human and material resources could not be used for imperial
purposes. Gandhi reiterated his belief that the imperial status quo
could never be the objective of the war and that Congress could
only reconsider its anti-war policy if Britain agreed to a date for its
withdrawal from the subcontinent. The British government had
long suffered Gandhi’s stubborn behavior, but it now judged the
Mahatma’s inflexibility a threat to its war effort. Gandhi,
however, refused to yield to entreaties or counter-threats or fear
of imprisonment. He was convinced the time was right for India to
regain its independence.

Jinnah, in sharp contrast to Congress leaders, offered the British
his cooperation. The Muslim League was brought into line with
wartime policy and in return for its support the party anticipated
more intimate association with the colonial authority. The Viceroy
noted the cooperation of the Muslim population and agreed to an
expansion of his Executive Council to include Mohammad Ali
Jinnah, whom the British now described as one of the colony’s
more popular leaders. Angry Congress leaders cited still another
version of Britain’s divide and rule policy, and condemned what
they judged to be the reintroduction of the communal issue. In
October 1939, the Congress ordered all serving officials to tender
their resignations in the colonial government and to join in a
countrywide action of non-cooperation. Jinnah heralded the
moment as a turning point in the Muslim League struggle with
the Congress, and with the 1937 election virtually nullified, fear of
a “Congress Raj” had also dissipated. The Muslim League was
renewed by these events. With newfound strength it began to
prepare itself for future contests with the Congress Party.

Jinnah had crossed his personal Rubicon. It was no longer a
question of melding Congress and Muslim League objectives. The
two political movements had passed a crossroads and now trod
very separate paths. Jinnah understood that his re-energized party,



The Origins of Pakistan 23

full of young cohorts, wanted nothing less than a self-governing
Muslim country. His challenge was not whether or not he should
press for an independent Muslim state, but what form it would
take. Through it all Jinnah remained the essential pragmatist. He
rejected anything even remotely related to the formation of a
political order founded on the notion of an Islamic state. Jinnah’s
philosophy of politics and government highlighted the liberalism
of the Western or European tradition. His thought rooted in
constitutionalism and legal guarantees of fundamental rights,
Jinnah sought the protection of the subcontinent’s minority
population and the weakest members of society. More secure in
the belief that such could not be realized in a unified India, Jinnah
now turned his attention to a more exclusive national context,
even if that meant pressing ahead with the partition of India.

Congress officials saw Jinnah’s actions and statements as anti-
democratic and authoritarian. By supporting the colonial authority
he had virtually denied the freedom movement. In hinting at
partition he had fallen in with separatists calling for the vivisection
of the subcontinent. Jinnah of course saw his actions in a different
light. The colonial experience had elevated people from conven-
tions that were not only archaic, but also anarchic. Hindus could
not be expected to conform to Muslim traditions, nor were
Muslims capable of associating themselves with Hindu rituals and
precepts. Britain had come to dominate India because it brought a
different philosophy of rule and, more importantly, a system of
law that could be applied uniformly to all, irrespective of separate
lifestyles and cultural practices. Colonialism was demeaning but it
also had a constructive side in an environment where a diverse
people had demonstrated an inability to find common identity. For
all its alien character, there was in the British experience an
opportunity for people at variance with one another to transcend
their differences and, in the course of events, to accommodate one
another. The British had in fact introduced the notion of civil
society to the subcontinent’s people. For Jinnah it was now a
question of finding the structural and procedural underpinnings
for the formation of such a civil society. Civil society for Jinnah
preceded full-blown democracy. Without a foundation based on
civil society, democracy was little more than a sham perpetrated
by either fools or demagogues. Thus, late in 1939 the Muslim



24 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

League, under Jinnah’s command, passed a resolution of satisfac-
tion with the Viceroy’s statement concerning the loyalty of the
monarchy’s subjects. As League president, Jinnah gave the colonial
government the League’s “fullest assurance of cooperation” in the
pursuance of the war.

For the Congress this was nothing less than capitulation.
Gandhi personally pleaded with Jinnah to call off “Deliverance
Day” activities, to silence negative statements directed against the
country’s Hindus, and to open a new round of conversations with
the Congress. But events had already outdistanced calls for
cooperation. The Congress could not abandon its anti-war
position, and the Muslim League was too committed to the idea
of a separate Muslim homeland to accept the idea of a unified
state. The ground was now prepared for the Muslim League
convention in Lahore, where on March 23, 1940 a resolution was
passed that called for the formation, in the not too distant future,
of a Muslim state or states where the Muslims were the majority.

Muslim leaders from the Muslim-dominant provinces, who
earlier had identified with their own provincial or regional parties,
now found reason to join the Muslim League. Sikandar Hyat
Khan, a Punjabi with a reputation for independent thought and
action, Fazlul Huq, the “Tiger of Bengal,” and Mohammad
Saadullah of Assam were in attendance. All had asked members of
their respective parties to join the League. Jinnah was now their
acknowledged leader in the national struggle with the Congress,
and it came as no surprise when Jinnah chose Fazlul Huq to
propose the Lahore (Pakistan) Resolution before this great east–
west assembly of Muslims. The resolution was deliberately left
ambiguous. There had been a number of publicized schemes for a
Muslim or Islamic state in the subcontinent. Rehmat Ali, the
student who in 1933 invented the name “Pakistan” while studying
in Britain, had founded the Pakistan National Movement in that
same year. In 1940 he published a pamphlet titled “The Millat of
Islam and the Menace of Indianism” in which he called for the
creation of a Pak Commonwealth. The Commonwealth idea
seemed to replicate the long-defunct Mughal Empire. Jinnah,
however, would have none of such schemes. His general policy
was aimed at restraining the more rabid among his followers while
maintaining an idea of a self-governing Muslim entity which said



The Origins of Pakistan 25

little about Islamic guidelines and much about the need to
establish a contemporary secular nation-state.

The geographic structuring of the Muslim state or states began
to take form with the Sir Abdullah Haroon Committee, which met
to finalize its work in November 1940. The committee called for
the formation of a Muslim state in the northwestern portion of
India and another in the northeast. It also left the impression that
the Nizam of Hyderabad, although ruling over a predominantly
Hindu population, would be given consideration as the leader of a
third Muslim region. Jinnah, however, was unprepared for any
precipitous action that left him with little room for maneuver. A
realist, he recognized that pie-in-the-sky propositions only made it
more difficult to negotiate change with the colonial authority, as
well as the Congress Party. Jinnah had adopted the two-nation
theory as his own, but the timing was not right to declare the unity
of India an impossible objective. At least not until such time as all
the parties had agreed to a mutual parting of the ways and
guarantees were in place to protect the innocent who would be
caught between opposed forces in the great divide.

Although opinion would be forever divided on who was most
responsible for the partition of British India, Jinnah wanted it
known that he had fought for a united India to the last, not under a
particular flag, but as one completely committed to the rule of law.
Much has been made of Jinnah’s late-hour rejection of a federal
scheme for India that would leave it with a strong center. It is
suggested that Jinnah was concerned that a Hindu majority would
so dominate the center that the Muslim periphery would never reap
the harvest of development. What is clear is not Jinnah’s denial of a
strong center in a federal system, but rather the plight of the
minority, no matter how secure regionally, under the subcontinent’s
overriding viceregal tradition. In other words, Jinnah was looking
for the safeguards in a federal system that would protect the
minorities from the majority’s arbitrary use of power. Confidence-
building measures had not fared well in the struggle for Indian
freedom, and indeed the struggle had been more a matter of
internecine strife than of skirmishes with the colonial government.

Jinnah preferred a more measured pace in contrast to his
followers who enthusiastically attempted to rush events to a
conclusion. Jinnah sensed the need for time. Even the envisioned



26 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Muslim state would require the blending of a variety of cultures,
aspirations, and mindsets in the several Muslim majority areas.
Provision also needed to be made for Muslims remaining in India
as well as Hindus and Sikhs who would fall within the Muslim
state. The vast majority of people residing in all areas of the
subcontinent were undereducated or illiterate, so fashioning a
workable polity from the impoverished many and the few
enlightened or materially advantaged people of the subcontinent
was an incredible challenge. Events, however, did not favor
Jinnah’s patient approach. The wars in and outside India were
creating a scenario that Jinnah could neither control nor direct.
Like so many other high-positioned actors, he was conditioned
and influenced by events, hardly their master.

The British role in the emergence of Pakistan

Two wars buffeted British India in the early 1940s. One was the
global contest that allied Germany and Japan against the British
Empire, and the other was the struggle to free India from the
colonial grasp of a distant European power. Of the two, the latter
was the far more complicated because it involved the long-term
future of the subcontinent and the nadir of the British Empire. The
war had not gone well for the British. Forced to retreat in the
Pacific and Asia, the Empire had been made to yield its colonies
stretching from Hong Kong to Malaya and Singapore, to Burma
and the borders of India. The Japanese advance had been as swift
as it was methodical. The British fleet had been virtually
neutralized as a successful fighting instrument, and the combined
British colonial forces were unable to prevent Japan from
leapfrogging into South Asia. Only the entry of American forces
into the war after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in
December 1941 offered the British a ray of hope that their
fortunes might yet be saved. In the European theater of conflict,
Britain had been left to fight Germany alone when France
surrendered. Again it was only the assistance provided by the
United States that offered a glimmer of hope, despite a heroic
defense of the British Isles by the Royal Air Force.

With Britain on the defensive worldwide, the colonial authority
in India was in a difficult position to ward off demands for



The Origins of Pakistan 27

independence. The Congress, however, was especially troublesome
because of its anti-war program. Gandhi did not suspend his
campaign, but, to the contrary, increased the pressure. It was not
extraordinary for people in high position to question Britain’s
capacity to fight a successful war against the Axis powers. In
India, the Congress, Gandhi included, had decided early on that
Britain would indeed lose the contest and thus would be forced to
give up its colonies, notably those already overrun by the Japanese
army. In some Indian circles the approaching Japanese were to be
considered liberators, and at the very least they would force the
British to yield their South Asian possession sooner than expected.
At the extreme, there was the old Congress leader Subas Chandra
Bose, who linked up with Japanese forces in Southeast Asia to
form the Indian National Army (INA), raised largely from
captured Indian army troops. His accidental death did not end
that scheme but without him the plan eventually fizzled. If nothing
more, the attempt to create an INA to serve alongside Japanese
forces illustrated the effort some Indians made to terminate British
rule in the subcontinent.

Britain’s determined resistance, combined with major benefits
derived from American and Soviet victories, ultimately saved the
Empire. Nevertheless it was obvious London would have to give
serious consideration to yielding its most prominent possessions.
With Winston Churchill at the helm of Britain’s war policies, in
1942 Sir Stafford Cripps was sent to India to discuss the Indian
question. Cripps cited the Japanese advance through Southeast
Asia and the Dutch Indies and its penetration of Burma as posing
a direct threat to both Australia and India. Gandhi’s campaign of
civil disobedience also had an echo in the speeches of the popular
ascetic Vinoba Bhave. Their combined tactics had seriously
undermined the British war effort, especially as troops scheduled
for the war with Japan had to be diverted to police the local
scene in India. Churchill, no friend of the Mahatma, would
publicize later his belief that Gandhi had stabbed Great Britain in
the back.

Jinnah and the Muslim League did not break their resolve to
support the colonial authority, however. While sustaining their call
for a Muslim homeland, Jinnah’s followers did not adopt the Axis
cause and many Muslims served faithfully in the imperial army.



28 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

The same could be said of Hindu units, but there was no mistaking
British policy to favor the Muslim soldiers after the losses suffered
in Southeast Asia and the subsequent formation of the INA.
Congress Hindus verbalized their disgust with Muslim League
tactics, which were described as disingenuous and meant only to
reap advantages in their quest for an independent Muslim state.
Declaring the Muslim League a fascist organization and indicating
it could do nothing to enhance the British role in India, Congress
leaders called upon Britain not to be fooled by a party of
“weaklings.” With the dialog between the two major Indian
parties at a new level of bitterness it was questionable how the
Cripps mission could ease conditions and, at the very least, get
the Congress to call off its program of disruption.

Cripps, Lord Privy Seal of the Empire and a member of the
British War Cabinet, brought with him a set of proposals that
called for the earliest realization of the goal of self-government for
India. The object of the proposals was the establishment of a new
Indian Union that would constitute India as a dominion within the
British Empire. India in effect would receive the same treatment as
the other dominions, e.g. Canada and Australia, which meant
taking charge of its domestic and external affairs in return for a
demonstration of allegiance to the Crown. Much of what Cripps
offered, however, would not take effect until the war had ended
and peace had been restored. Pending those events, India would
elect a body that would be charged with framing a constitution for
the entire country. His Majesty’s government would also call for
the participation of India’s princely states in these constitutional
deliberations.

The proposals also focused attention on the demands made by
the Muslim League when it specified that non-acceding, i.e. the
Muslim-dominant, provinces might desire to form their own
constitution-making body. In other words, Cripps wanted it
known that his government was duty bound to protect the rights
of all racial and religious minorities and, in so doing, to permit
them to establish a political edifice more suitable to their needs.
If in fact the Muslim provinces decided on a separate course, it
would be left to the newly created Indian Union, obviously under
Congress leadership, to negotiate a settlement that would be
mutually acceptable to all the parties.



The Origins of Pakistan 29

Congress reaction to the Cripps proposals was swift and
negative. In their collective judgment Britain continued to play
divide and rule politics and the party let it be known it would not
accept the proposals. Within a period of less than three weeks,
Cripps announced the failure of his mission. Noting that he never
had suggested supporting the Pakistan demand, that he continued
to believe in a united India, he nevertheless let the Congress and
Muslim League leaders understand that the Empire was engaged
in a great war and that the defense of India could not be left in
indigenous hands. The Congress position was clearly stated. If
Britain insisted on a dominant role in India, Pakistan was likely to
be ceded to the Muslims, Khalistan would be created for the Sikhs,
and even India’s depressed castes might be offered autonomy. The
British purpose, it was said, was nothing less than the vivisection
of the subcontinent. Congress critics of the Cripps proposals
pointed to the fact that a Constituent Assembly would be created
to write a constitution and it would be formed on the basis of
separate electorates, the reservation of seats for women, tribal
people, etc., and, not less important, restricted franchise.

The Cripps proposals did not please any of the arrayed groups.
The Hindu Mahasabha was totally opposed. So too the Sikhs.
They failed to see their objectives realized, especially if the
Muslims were given first consideration in territories they jointly
inhabited. But even the Muslim League had its doubts. The
execution of all the features of the proposals would hardly grant
the Muslims the security they desired against a Hindu-dominated
government. Jinnah declared in an Allahabad session of the
Muslim League that the proposals would keep “the Musalmans
tied to the chariot-wheel of Hindustan.” Therefore, when Cripps
left India for Britain the proposals were withdrawn. Although
some of the items were to be revisited at a later date, the mission
had had an entirely negative effect on Indian politics. The major
communities were even more at loggerheads, more prone to do
violence to one another, and most reluctant to consider a
compromise formula that might bridge their differences.

Subsequently, the Congress Working Committee passed a
resolution on July 14, 1942 demanding the immediate withdrawal
of British power from the subcontinent. Displaying no concern
about the Japanese penetration of Assam and Bengal, the Congress



30 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

leaders had obviously concluded that Japanese pressure would
accelerate the British withdrawal, leaving the Indians to sort out
their future. If Congress projections proved accurate, in the
absence of the British Raj the Muslim League would lose its
purpose and the demand for Pakistan would be muted. But for the
Congress to believe that Britain had had enough of its South Asian
colony, or that the British imperial army would surrender to
Japan, was ludicrous. Moreover, an American force was beginning
to operate in Burma, and another was feverishly constructing a
road to China. The Allied forces in the Pacific in July 1942 had
launched their first serious engagement against Japanese bases in
the South Pacific and the battle for Guadalcanal had signaled the
start of a counter-offensive that was destined to move toward the
Japanese islands.

The Allies had created the China–Burma–India theater of
operations and Lord Louis Mountbatten had been established as
its commanding officer. Britain had fallen back from Singapore
and Rangoon but its new resistance point was Calcutta. The Royal
Air Force had established a presence in the city’s downtown area
from where it launched raids against Japanese positions and, more
significantly, defended India’s skies from Japanese air attacks. If
the Indian National Congress anticipated Britain would yield
India as it had Malaya they were badly mistaken. The conflict was
far from over and with stretched supply lines Japan would find it
rougher going making war in eastern India. Significantly, the
Japanese advance through Asia stalled at India’s eastern borders
and, though the Congress might sustain its civil disobedience
campaign, the future of India would wait on the termination of
hostilities as Cripps had indicated earlier.

The quest for Pakistan took on more credibility following the
failure of the Cripps mission. At the same time the Congress Party
more vehemently rejected all discussion about a separate Pakistan
state. Joined by Shyama Prasad Mookerjee and his Hindu
Mahasabha, the Congress agreed to send key members to different
regions of the country to preach defiance of any British order that
would seriously consider secessionist movements. Mookerjee had
a long history of inciting fear among Muslims, and his position
alongside the Congress did nothing to reduce the feeling of
foreboding felt by Muslims in different areas of the subcontinent.



The Origins of Pakistan 31

The Mahasabha leader said that nothing would be permitted to
stand in the way of India’s progress toward independence and that
his organization would resist any attempt to transform the country
into a chessboard of rival enclaves.

Jinnah was perceived as riding a strong wave of British support.
His critics accused him and his aides of the intoxication that
comes from too much power. Jinnah’s demand for one-third
Muslim representation on India’s Executive Council and Chaudhri
Khaliquzzaman’s comment that Pakistan was only the beginning
of a process of greater Muslim power from South to Southwest
Asia were offered as evidence. Hindus were put on notice that if
the Muslim League were allowed to succeed, Hindu India would
be reduced to a small island in a vast Muslim sea. Mutual fears
therefore influenced the course of events. Each side envisaged the
worst if the other achieved its desired goal, and few among the
principals in this drama were prepared to give ground or seek
compromise.

When the tide of war turned in favor of the Allied cause,
Congress protestations against the colonial authority waned
rapidly. Civil disobedience was still a formidable Congress
weapon but the British were in an improved position to cope
with the situation, and the question of independence had become
the question of what form independence would take. The major
Congress concern was the leverage gained by the Muslim League
in the course of the war. Informed opinion more and more held the
position that Britain was certain to partition the colony between
Hindus and Muslims, or at least between the two most vocal of
the national organizations, the Indian National Congress and the
Muslim League. Gandhi had made his case for Indian freedom;
about that there was no real debate in Whitehall. The remaining
question was what to do with Jinnah’s demand for a separate
Muslim majority state, the country that all now referred to as
Pakistan.

From 1942 until the end of World War II in 1945, Jinnah and his
colleagues offered numerous dissertations on the reasons for
establishing Pakistan. History and culture were only part of the
argument. The attempt to achieve the unity of Hindus and
Muslims had been strenuously pursued without success. Too much
had happened since Gandhi had returned from South Africa during



32 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

World War I. The subcontinent had been transformed. Popular
movements had sprung up throughout the country and demands
were now legion from numerous organizations across an expanded
political spectrum. Few movements could be treated seriously, and
even fewer could be given serious consideration if the character of
the subcontinent were to be preserved. Moreover, too much blood
had been shed in maintaining the Empire, and even at that moment
of its certain dissolution the British hoped that retreat could be
made with dignity. The freeing of the colonies was seen in the
course of events, but so too was the formation of the Common-
wealth that would bind the new states to one another and, most
important, to the once and future mother country.

The Labor government under the leadership of Prime Minister
Clement Attlee had replaced Churchill’s wartime government in
1945. The war in the Pacific had not yet ended. One of Attlee’s
first acts, however, was to declare his intention to give India its
freedom. The Viceroy, Lord Wavell, was recalled to London for
direct discussions with his superiors about the manner of the
transfer of power and when it might be feasible. Wavell returned
to India with a set of proposals that were described as the “Wavell
Plan.” The plan called for the creation of a new Executive Council
that was fully representative of India’s principal communities and
that would include an equal proportion of caste Hindus and
Muslims. Finance, home and foreign affairs were to be made
Indian concerns, and Britain agreed to appoint a High Commis-
sioner (an ambassador) in India, thus giving the country virtual
sovereign status. The newly constituted Executive Council would
be expected to give its full support to the continuing war against
Japan, and would assume the role of an interim government until
such time as a permanent constitution was drafted and promul-
gated. To implement the proposals the Viceroy called a meeting of
representatives from a variety of organizations to meet at the hill
station of Simla on June 25, 1945. Lord Wavell also announced
the release of incarcerated Congress Working Committee officials,
as well as those imprisoned as a consequence of the Quit India
Movement.

Jinnah had pondered the meaning of the Labor Party takeover
in Britain. He did not have the same relationship with Attlee that
he had developed with Churchill. Nor was Attlee as sensitive to



The Origins of Pakistan 33

the Muslim role in the war. He therefore began to see signs of
betrayal in the Wavell Plan, not in the matter of India’s
independence, but in how the Muslims were to be safeguarded
in a country controlled and dominated by Hindus. Fearful that
British tactics were aimed at dividing the Muslims and turning
them against themselves, Jinnah insisted on speaking for all the
subcontinent’s Muslim population. He therefore demanded the
right of the Muslim League to nominate all Muslims serving on
the Executive Council. Lord Wavell, however, refused to entertain
such power being granted to a single organization. As Viceroy, he
insisted on his right to name the representatives, but Jinnah
refused to be sidetracked.

Jinnah’s intransigence was a response to the Congress decision
to appoint Muslims to the Executive Council, a policy that Jinnah
believed was still another version of “divide and rule.” Maulana
Kalam Azad, a Congress leader of vast reputation and a Gandhi
follower of long standing, accused Jinnah of dictatorial practices.
So too did Malik Khizar Hayat Khan Tiwana, the Unionist leader
in the Punjab, who found Jinnah’s demand an outrageous
declaration and beyond the pale of democratic behavior. Such
Muslim voices were aimed at the British as much as they were
directed toward Jinnah. The Muslim League leader would have to
expect stiff opposition to his claim that he spoke for all Muslims.
Although blame for the breakdown of the Simla conference was
directed at Jinnah, it also could be said that the Congress was not
disturbed by that breakdown. The Wavell Plan, by giving
numerous organizations a place on the Executive Council, reduced
the Congress’s representation, but the party’s political role was
little diminished. The Congress in fact was even more ready to do
business with the Crown.

Lord Wavell’s continuing discussions in London led to the
second Wavell Plan, but it was even less successful than the first
and was rejected by all the parties. In February 1946 the Attlee
government tried yet again. What was described as a “Cabinet
Mission,” led by Lord Pethick Lawrence and including Sir Stafford
Cripps and A.V. Alexander, First Lord of the Admiralty, journeyed
to India for the purpose of finding a formula for an Indian
constitution. Nehru’s immediate reaction was less than positive.
He called upon the British to declare India’s independence.



34 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

A constitution could be drafted later. Jinnah on the other hand
voiced his opposition to a single constitution-making body.
Despite this early opposition, however, the Cabinet Mission
remained optimistic, and efforts were launched to speak openly
and frankly with an array of Indian leaders representing different
regions as well as cultures and political interests. The talks,
however, were reduced to the principals, Gandhi and the Congress
leaders insisting they could not accept the partition of India, and
Jinnah arguing there could be no other solution. Despite the
impasse the Cabinet Mission persisted and finally agreed to focus
its attention on the Congress and the Muslim League. Another call
went out to meet at Simla in what was described as a tripartite
conference that would include the two major parties and the
British government. Like the previous Simla meeting, however,
this one too failed to examine the issues before it was disbanded.

Not willing to accept yet another failure, the Cabinet Mission
and the Viceroy presented their own plan for the transfer of power.
Their plan called for a Union of India that embodied all of the
country, including the princely states. The Union would be
responsible for foreign affairs, defense, communications, and
finance, and its executive institution and legislature would be
constituted along parliamentary lines. Questions arising in the
legislature involving the communal issue would have to be resolved
by a majority of the representatives from both the Hindu and
Muslim communities, as well as a majority of all members present
and voting. Powers not granted the Union would devolve to the
provinces. Princely states would likewise retain those powers not
considered Union subjects. Constitutional issues engaging the
Union and the provinces or the Union and the states would be
subject to review after ten years, and each ten-year period
following. The Cabinet Mission then called for the formation of
a constitution-making body that would be drawn from the
recently elected provincial legislatures. Each province was to be
allotted seats in proportion to its population.

As constitution making moved forward, an interim government
was to be formed with full powers to direct government policy.
The system envisioned was essentially unitary; the hope being that
Hindus and Muslims could find common ground based on the
principal of secularism and that there would be no need to pursue



The Origins of Pakistan 35

the idea of separate states drawn along communal lines. Pethick-
Lawrence referred to the nightmare of dividing the subcontinent
into Hindu and Muslim dominant regions. Pakistan, he asserted,
could not be formed without including a forty-percent Hindu
minority within its borders. Citing the Muslim majority in Bengal,
Pethick-Lawrence was quick to point out that Calcutta, the great
commercial metropolis, was populated by far more Hindus than
Muslims. Also puzzling to the Cabinet Mission was the status of
the Indian army that had just distinguished itself in World War II.

Partitioning the subcontinent also meant dividing the Indian
army. How might India be defended if the army was divided and
one section was given control of strategic areas to the detriment
of the other? In summary: the Cabinet Mission appeared to reject
the establishment of Pakistan while at the same time allowing the
individual provinces a considerable amount of latitude in deciding
whether to accept or reject the idea of Union.

On June 6, 1946, the Muslim League Council, to the surprise of
many, accepted the Cabinet Mission scheme. It agreed to join the
constitution-making body with the understanding that the
provinces retained the option to abandon the Union under terms
specified earlier. Much was made dependent on the final
determination of the constitution-making effort. Jinnah also
accepted the proposed interim government and insisted on the
observance of a formula for parity between the Congress and
the Muslim League. The Congress was already on record opposing
parity. In fact, the Congress had further reason to oppose the
Cabinet Mission plan. Separate electorates were sustained against
Congress objections. The Congress also found the Viceroy’s
decision to prevent the Congress from appointing Muslims to
the interim government unacceptable. These decisions were made
to appease Jinnah, complained Congress officials, and they would
not accept them. When the Viceroy announced his list of members
for the interim government on June 16, none of the Congress
complaints had been addressed. The Muslim League had been
given parity with the Congress and all the Congress members were
either Hindus, Sikhs or Christians. As a consequence, more
Muslims were appointed than Hindus. Congress therefore
announced it could not support the interim government and
would not serve in it. Congress did agree to participate in the



36 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Constituent Assembly, however, and hoped thereby to introduce a
political order that was more consistent with its ideology and
practices.

The colonial government declared its satisfaction that a
constitution-making body would be established, but without prior
warning reversed its original position. It declared it had decided to
bypass the interim government idea in favor of a caretaker unit
until such time as the constitutional issues were resolved. Jinnah
saw still another betrayal in the British action. Lord Wavell was
accused of having backed away from an earlier statement that the
interim government would be formed even if only one of the two
parties agreed to its terms. Moreover, Jinnah had believed that his
discussions with the Viceroy and the members of the Cabinet
Mission had resulted in firm agreement. Under the terms of the
original understanding, Congress rejection and Muslim League
approval meant the latter would form the interim government.
Wavell, however, had reneged on his pledge. Instead he called
upon Nehru to form the interim government with or without
Muslim League compliance. The only conclusion Jinnah could
draw was that Wavell had gone too far in placating the Muslim
League and that the Attlee government was duty bound to go with
the Congress.

Jinnah was devastated. When Nehru subsequently asked Jinnah
to join his caretaker government, the Muslim leader angrily
declined. The Cabinet Mission proposals had been turned on their
head. In the final analysis, the Congress was provided carte
blanche. The Muslim League was left with the option of either
joining Nehru’s administration or leaving the field to its rivals.
After further discussions with the Viceroy, the League agreed
to join Nehru’s cabinet on a limited basis. Liaquat Ali Khan,
I.I. Chundrigar, Sardar Abdur Rab Nishtar, Ghazanfar Ali Khan,
and Jogendarnath Mandal (a Hindu) accepted portfolios in the
name of the League. The decision of the League to assume roles in
the government, however, did not extend to participation in the
Constituent Assembly. The League boycotted these sessions, thus
making constitution making impossible.

Observing the failure of all efforts at compromise, Prime
Minister Attlee, with advice from members of his Cabinet
Mission, decided that nothing Britain could do would bring the



The Origins of Pakistan 37

parties together. Britain at this time, so soon after the termination
of hostilities, was burdened by the daunting task of clearing the
rubble and reconstructing its cities after six years of conflict. The
Empire’s economy needed priming, and a way of life was in dire
need of rehabilitation. A victim even more than a victor in the war
just ended, Britain also was in a poor position to administer its
possessions. India had been Britain’s proudest conquest, but the
subcontinent was ablaze from one end to the other with
unrestrained mobs seeking advantages from a weakened imperial
system. Anarchy was not uncommon, especially in Bengal. In
1946, the Muslim League observed “Direct Action Day,” and set
off displays of lawlessness seldom experienced in the volatile
subcontinent. Looting and murder in Calcutta spread into the
Bengal hinterland and produced the atrocities visited upon
Noakhali and other locations.

Gandhi made a personal visit to Noakhali but his attempt at
pacification proved fruitless. Killings ranged over Bihar province,
into Uttar Pradesh, and fueled violence in Punjab as well as on the
North West Frontier. Those seeking a simple explanation for the
mayhem placed responsibility on Jinnah and the Muslim League,
but it was also obvious that the weighty events of the prior
decades were piled too high over a much weakened colonial
edifice. British authority was either too feeble or too indifferent,
and it failed to take the actions necessary to quell the disorder.
Concluding that it could no longer keep the peace or broker a
compromise formula acceptable to all the parties, London finally
bowed to pressure and announced it had decided to break up the
Empire. With something resembling a lament, on February 20,
1947, Attlee declared his government would transfer power to the
Indian people at the earliest possible date. Britain in fact had made
plans to leave India no later than June 1948. Lord Wavell was
ordered back to London and Lord Earl Mountbatten was named
the new and last Viceroy of India.

Mountbatten wasted no time in warning the Congress and
Muslim League leaders that any further delay in arriving at a
constitutional settlement would leave him with no other option
than to determine how and in what manner the final transfer of
power would take place. Moreover, Mountbatten was eager to
expedite the process. Patience exhausted, Moutbatten quickly



38 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

announced that the date for Britain’s withdrawal had been
changed at his order. Instead of June 1948, the transfer and
retreat would occur in August 1947. Unprepared for this change in
schedule and fearing another reversal, Jinnah again issued a call
for “Direct Action.” This time there would be no ambiguities. The
call was for the formation of an independent Pakistan.

Conditions again were explosive as mobs took to the streets
attacking members of rival religious and ethnic groups. Numerous
atrocities occurred in the name of divine sanction. Law and order
was virtually impossible to maintain. Again, responsibility for the
slaughter and destruction centered on the actions of the Muslim
League, and especially Mohammad Ali Jinnah. Many organizations
were affected by the Mountbatten decision, however. More than
the League had a stake in the future India and the Viceroy had left
so little time to register so many interests. Among the major
claimants to power were the Sikhs. Playing a significant role in the
Punjab, the Sikh Akali Dal challenged the Muslim claim to
dominate the Punjab. Moreover, the Muslim League had only
recently substituted themselves for the Unionists, and the Sikhs
accused the League of manipulating the Sikhs’ Punjabi identity.
The Sikhs therefore insisted on a homeland of their own, a place
they called “Khalistan.” The Balkanization of the subcontinent
was not what the British had in mind. The Sikhs were denied
a separate state. Confronted with the choice of living in either a
Hindu- or Muslim-dominant country, the Sikhs rebelled but
vented virtually all their anger against Punjabi Muslims.

Having only assumed the office of Viceroy on March 24, by June
3, 1947 Mountbatten had seen and heard enough to convince him
to make short work of his commission. The Viceroy announced the
methods for the transfer of power in a broadcast to the nation. In
so far as Hindus and Muslims could not be reconciled, the areas
where the Muslims were in the majority would be allowed to form
a separate dominion. A Constituent Assembly would be created for
that dominion, but first the colonial authority would divide the
provinces of Punjab and Bengal so that Hindu- and Sikh-dominant
regions would fall within the Indian Union. In other words, the
eastern Punjab, which stretched from Amritsar to a region close to
the Indian capital, would be denied to Pakistan. By the same token,
Calcutta and West Bengal would be awarded to India. Frontiers



The Origins of Pakistan 39

were to be completed in the shortest possible time. In the case of
the North West Frontier Province, which earlier had elected a
Congress government, the Viceroy ordered the holding of a
plebiscite to gauge the will of the Pashtun people. Finally, the
Assamese territory of Sylhet, because of its Muslim character, was
to be merged with Bengal if agreed by a popular referendum.
Boundary commissions were to be established almost immediately
to define the frontiers between the two new dominions of India and
Pakistan. By the order of the Viceroy, India was given immediate
dominion status.

Few celebrated Mountbatten’s decisions. The Congress saw
only distress in the “vivisection” of the subcontinent. More
extreme nationalists perceived unending conflict. Muslims found
much to question in the formation of a “truncated and moth-
eaten” Pakistan. Whatever the politicians had intended by their
long, arduous struggle, it clearly was not reflected in the Viceroy’s
announcement. Too little time and too much hatred prevented the
major actors from arriving at a better formula. Faced with a fait
accompli, they could only stumble into an uncertain future. In the
end, it was a distant European power that determined the fate of
the subcontinent’s multitudes. Sir Cyril Radcliffe was rushed from
London to Delhi to chair the two territorial commissions that
determined the division of Punjab and Bengal, and the British
parliament approved the India Independence Bill on July 1, 1947
without a single dissenting vote. On schedule, Great Britain
terminated its rule over the subcontinent and in two ceremonies
transferred authority to the Indian National Congress and the
Muslim League on August 14–15, 1947. With the India
Independence Act approved by the British parliament, not only
India and Pakistan were established as sovereign, independent
dominions. The rulers of the princely states, more than six
hundred of them, were also given the option of declaring their
independence.

Defining the Pakistan ethos

India and Pakistan were a consequence of unresolved conflict
between the very recipients of the transfer of power. The colonial
institution, by contrast, departed India in grand style, without a



40 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

display of anger, and with much ceremony and pomp. Unlike in
other colonies gaining independence following World War II,
national self-determination was never clearly defined in the Indian
subcontinent. Independence did not arrive at the end of a colonial
war of liberation. The triangular character of the struggle for
freedom was more an internal test of strength between two major
indigenous contenders, one of which was prepared to wait upon
the evolution of events while the other was determined to achieve
self-government at the earliest moment. There also were numerous
lesser actors, all stressing their claim to an independent course.
However, only the Indian National Congress led by Mahatma
Gandhi and the Muslim League of Mohammad Ali Jinnah
addressed national interests. All the others were regional in one
form or another, and in such cases the British were prepared to
acknowledge only the royal satrapies with whom the Crown had
separate treaties that entitled them to self-governing status.

The government of India moved quickly to terminate the
sovereignty of these princely states, with the exception of Kashmir,
where the Hindu Maharajah was determined to sustain his
authority over a predominantly Muslim population. In the Hindu-
dominant princely state of Hyderabad, however, where the
Muslim Nizam also intended to continue his independent ways,
the Indian government forcefully removed the ruler and seized his
kingdom. Kashmir therefore was the exception. The Muslim-
dominant character of the state had made the Maharajah an
anachronism. Moreover, conflict, so frequent and historic a
circumstance between the Dogra Hindu kingdom of Kashmir
and the tribal Pushtuns of the adjoining northern areas, assumed
another dimension after partition. Unable to defend his kingdom
from tribal invasions without external assistance, the Maharajah
called upon India for help. India agreed to answer that distress call
only if the potentate agreed to accede to the Indian Union, which,
it is argued, he did before fleeing the region. With the Maharajah
no longer a player, the contest was now between the two new
dominions, both claiming their right to annex the mountain
territory, one by the nature of the resident Muslim population, the
other by legal accession. Thus, the conflict between the Indian
National Congress and the Muslim League was extended well past
the moment of the British transfer. Instead of the rival major



The Origins of Pakistan 41

parties reconciling their differences with the end of colonialism,
the struggle that had characterized their pre-independence
experience was perpetuated.

Kashmir was transformed into the symbol of both Indian and
Pakistani resolve. India, already teeming with millions of
Muslims, saw no reason to deny itself control of a state because
of its Muslim majority. Arguing a secular program, India refrained
from ideological distinctions. Nor did it seek to emphasize ethnic
and racial differences. Stressing a collective principle, India
postured as an open democracy, capable of representing diversity
and promising its minorities both security and equal opportunity.
Pakistan assumed a different approach that seemed to challenge
the Indian example. Pakistan was a country created by Muslims
for Muslims in a turbulent environment. Moreover, prior to and
following partition, the different communities faced assaults by
legions of radicals and fanatics on all sides. Minorities were all at
risk despite the pleadings of the leaders who had labored so long
and so fervently for independence.

In the immediate aftermath of partition, the communal warfare
that had begun years before was carried to an extreme. The
slaughter of the innocent on both sides of the great divide mounted
with each passing day. Instruments of law and order were made
more helpless by the nature of the transfer of power, or else by an
utter lack of preparation. Moreover, British forces were unavailable
for the task of taming such a rabid display of calumny. Atrocities
were attributed to all sides in the equation, not simply Hindu versus
Muslim and vice versa. Sikhs were a prominent force in the Punjab,
where the slaughter became the most intense. Acts of arbitrary and
malicious violence were directed against the weakest elements
across the whole north of the subcontinent. How many millions
had their lives terminated during this period will never be known.
Refugees were estimated to number between fifteen and twenty
million. India may have avoided formal war in achieving its
freedom, but it could not avoid the human toll consequent upon the
inability or stubborn reluctance of the political parties to find a
compromise formula. The fate of many innocents was sealed and
the two new dominions, now independent nation-states, became
immediate enemies. The hateful venom released in the orgy of
partition infected India–Pakistan relations from that time forward.



42 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Each saw the other as a determined foe, and each was equally
determined to defend itself from the other at any cost.

In Pakistan the cost was the vision of the country’s founder,
Mohammad Ali Jinnah. In his quest for Pakistan, Jinnah had been
opposed by many Muslim groups. Not the least of this opposition
was the collection of Muslim clerics, the ulema. In the period
leading up to independence the most prominent member of this
self-proclaimed body was Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, a long-time
member of the Congress and a soul mate of Mahatma Gandhi.
Long before Pakistan gained independence he had taken the role
of a full-time politician, his main task to reject the formation of
Pakistan. No less significant was the Deoband School of Islam,
also associated with the Congress Party. The Deoband’s control of
the Delhi Jamiat-i-Ulema-i-Hind made it a potent force in the
politics of the subcontinent, and its fire was directed against
Jinnah, whom it, like the Hindus, saw as a lackey of the British
Raj. Deoband’s fundamentalism was expressed in its anti-British
position. The members of the Muslim religious elite therefore
considered Jinnah a heretic and an unbeliever. They had devoted
years to the cause of freeing the Muslims from colonial rule and
had long concluded that the British were the chief enemy of Islam,
the subjugators of Muslims from Egypt to India. For the Deoband,
therefore, the British hold on India was the fundamental reason
for the decline of Islamic civilization. Jinnah had reached out to
the Jamiat in the 1935 elections, but they failed to honor his
appeal for their votes. Maulana Abul Ala Maudoodi, founder of
the Jamaat-i-Islami, was another Muslim cleric who rejected
Jinnah and the call for an independent Pakistan. Jinnah was made
the target of personal attacks in which holy scripture was used to
vilify him. Jinnah nevertheless persisted in his efforts; the vulgarity
of the assaults made upon him only steeled his resolve. The
Muslim devotees were so blinded by their fury that they opposed
every maneuver, every utterance made by the Quaid-i-Azam.

Jinnah believed his cause was a Muslim cause despite the
diatribe of his religious opponents. Moreover, given the intensity of
this assault upon his person as well as his leadership, Jinnah was
more convinced that only a secular formula, as found in Europe,
and notably in the British experience, could provide Pakistan with
a firm foundation. “The Congress ulema repeated the Hindu



The Origins of Pakistan 43

slander ad nauseam that Pakistan was the brain child of the
British.” The ulema therefore may have denied the Muslim League
but they adopted with alacrity the Indian cause in promoting an
independent Pakhtunistan. The ulema opposed the referendum in
Muslim-dominant Sylhet, but they worked strenuously to hold the
region for India. Before his death even Mohammad Iqbal had
found it necessary to strike out against the Deobandi fundamen-
talists. He accused them of malicious and retrograde actions that
inflicted great harm on Muslims everywhere. With support drawn
from people like Iqbal and with the vituperative assault on his
Muslim identity unrelenting, Jinnah forcefully argued a secular
vision for Pakistan. Moreover, it was because no other Muslim
League leader possessed the mettle to articulate a secular objective
that Jinnah, despite poor health, assumed the role of the country’s
first head of state.

Bibliography
Akhilananda, Swami, Hindu Psychology: Its Meaning for the West, New

York: Harper, 1946.
Bahadur, Lal, The Muslim League, Its History, Activities and Achieve-

ments, Agra: Agra Book Store, 1954.
Bin Sayeed, Khalid, Pakistan: The Formative Phase, Karachi: Pakistan

Publishing House, 1960.
Bolitho, Hector, Jinnah: The Creator of Pakistan, London: John Murray,

1954.
Chaudhrui, Nirad C., The Autobiography of an Unknown Indian,

London: Macmillan, 1951.
Chaudhuri, Nirad C., The Continent of Circe: An Essay on the Peoples of

India, New York: Oxford University Press, 1966.
Coupland, R., Indian Politics, 1936–1942, London: Oxford University

Press, 1944.
Coupland, R., The Indian Problem: Report on the Constitutional

Problem in India, New York: Oxford University Press, 1944.
Faruqi, Ziya-ul-Hasan, The Deoband School and the Demand for

Pakistan, Bombay: Asia Publishing, 1963.
Firishta, Muhammad Kasim, History of the Rise of the Muhammadan

Power in India, Calcutta: Susil Gupta, 1958.
Gandhi, M.K., Gandhi’s Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments

with Truth, Washington: Public Affairs Press, 1948.
Hossain, Syed Mohammad, Our Difficulties and Wants in the Path of the

Progress of India, London: W.H. Allen, 1884.



44 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Hunter, W.W., The Indian Musalmans, 2nd edn., London: Trubner, 1872.
Moon, Penderel, Divide and Quit, Berkeley: University of California

Press, 1962.
Mosley, Leonard, The Last Days of the British Raj, New York: Harcourt,

Brace & World, 1961.
Nehru, Jawaharlal, Toward Freedom: The Autobiography of Jawaharlal

Nehru, New York, John Day, 1941.
Park, Richard L. and Tinker, Irene, eds., Leadership and Political

Institutions in India, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1959.
Qureshi, Ishtiaq Husain, Ulema in Politics, Karachi: Ma’Aref, 1974.
Shah, A.B. and Rao, C.R.M, eds., Tradition and Modernity in India,

Bombay: Manaktalas, 1965.
Sharan, Parmatma, The Imperial Legislative Council of India, Delhi:

S. Chand, 1961.
Smith, Donald Eugene, India as a Secular State, Princeton: Princeton

University Press, 1963.
Smith, Donald Eugene, ed., South Asian Politics and Religion, Princeton:

Princeton University Press, 1966.
Smith, Wilfred Cantwell, Modern Islam in India: A Social Analysis,

Lahore: Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, 1943.
Stephens, Ian, Pakistan, New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1963.
Symonds, Richard, The Making of Pakistan, London: Faber & Faber,

1950.
Tinker, Hugh, South Asia: A Short History, 2nd edn., Honolulu:

University of Hawaii Press, 1990.
Wolpert, Stanley, Tilak and Gokhale: Revolution and Reform in the

Making of Modern India, Berkeley: University of California Press,
1961.

Wolpert, Stanley, Jinnah of Pakistan, New York: Oxford University Press,
1984.



2
POLITICAL ASPIRATIONS

Although in failing health, Mohammad Ali Jinnah assumed the
role of Governor General of Pakistan. By contrast, Gandhi chose
to avoid public office and devoted himself to healing the deep
wounds of communalism. Jinnah, however, had little choice. With
his newborn country already at the brink of self-destruction, it
was only his presence at the helm of affairs that stirred his
followers to more substantial efforts. In major part, Pakistan
comprised those regions of British India that were poor and
undeveloped. Denied West Bengal, whatever industrial capacity
might have been awarded the new state had been given to India.
Pakistan had no choice but to accept East Bengal, a jute-growing
hinterland and home of more than forty million of the
subcontinent’s most deprived peasantry. Pakistan’s western wing,
separated from East Bengal by one thousand miles of hostile India,
was awarded only half of the Punjab, with India in position to
disrupt some of the vital river sources feeding Pakistan’s
agricultural lands. Moreover, Sind province in the southeast was
among the most backward areas of the subcontinent, and the
North West Frontier Province, still very much a tribal preserve,
though strategically important, otherwise possessed little in the
way of economic product. Balochistan was still a tribal preserve
ruled by local patriarchs. Barren and sparsely populated, its
natural resources awaited discovery. “Truncated and moth-eaten”

45



46 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

was Jinnah’s characterization of the new Pakistan. Few questioned
that description. Pakistan may have been a consequence of hard
bargaining, but the Viceroy’s take-it-or-leave-it offer and his rush
to judgment left no room for further negotiation.

Jinnah confronted a war over Kashmir on the day independence
was granted. Moreover, the British Indian army had yet to be
satisfactorily divided and, even with a British general at the head
of the new Pakistan army, the military stores that India was to
transfer to Pakistan had not materialized. Logistically, the war in
Kashmir favored the Pakistanis but their ill-equipped and still to
be structured force could only do token damage to a more intact
and formidable Indian army, also led by an Englishman. Thus,
Pakistani forces occupied a portion of the disputed territory, but
the predominantly Muslim Vale, the heartland of the Kashmiri
nation, proved beyond reach.

Jinnah also was challenged by a massive flow of Muslim
refugees who had fled their homes in India. Caring for the millions
who spilled over Pakistan’s borders in the weeks and months
immediately following partition strained the very meager
resources of the young nation, and the vast majority of these
misbegotten went unattended. Hundreds of thousands flooded the
sleepy resort and fishing seaport of Karachi, which had been made
Pakistan’s capital. In need of basic assistance they constructed
shelters that were little more than hovels, and set out to besiege
government officials in a desperate attempt to gain relief. Jinnah
was humbled by the sight of the huddled and suffering refugees
but was forced to acknowledge his inability to alleviate their
plight.

Pakistan had virtually nothing from which to construct a
government, let alone a treasury to serve the needs of an ever-
expanding citizenry. The basic necessities were either non-existent
or in extremely short supply. Buildings had to be commandeered
for government use, and office furniture was a rarity. The
government was even limited in pencils and writing paper and
simply keeping track of needs and demands was often more than
officials could manage. Jinnah’s central role in assembling and
running the new administration therefore was unavoidable. Only
the Quaid-i-Azam engendered the confidence that succored the
former colonial bureaucrats who opted for Pakistan.



Political Aspirations 47

The colonial civil service was the only professional instrument
of government, and fewMuslim civil servants had had much if any
experience in managing departments and agencies, or, for that
matter, taking charge of day-to-day operations. Suddenly
advanced into high positions, they took their cues from Jinnah,
who spurred them on to higher levels of achievement. The
selflessness exhibited by government officials in those first trying
weeks, and the discipline and professionalism of the career officers
were a tribute to Jinnah’s looming presence. So much had been
sacrificed and so many depended upon the integrity of those in key
positions that no one was permitted to consider failure an option.
It has been said that without the leadership of Mohammad Ali
Jinnah, Pakistan would never have achieved independence. It also
was said that without Jinnah’s leadership in those initial months
after independence the nation would not have survived.

The center and the periphery

Jinnah’s tasks were even more formidable than intimated above.
The Quaid had to contend with a country made up of disparate
regions that had only recently accepted the rule of the Muslim
League. Provincial and local leaders were well entrenched in all
the western provinces at the time of independence. A number had
favored the Congress and were more inclined to follow Gandhi
than Jinnah. The Pakistan Movement had gained strength in
central India where Muslims were in the minority. In the
territories that became Pakistan, Muslims were in the majority
and the cry “Islam in Danger” did not have the same import. The
Muslim League had to win the favor of numerous regional
leaders, and it was evident from the start that many could not be
influenced to follow the party line. For the holdouts the Muslim
League was an alien organization with a message that threatened
their personal independence. As far back as 1919, when dyarchy
was first introduced in the subcontinent, local leaders had
assumed positions of significant power. With the independence
of Pakistan they were expected to share and in some cases to
relinquish their prerogatives to rivals who now identified with the
Muslim League. Moreover, the League monopolized power in
the federal government, and with Jinnah’s looming presence the



48 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

critics had reason to describe the nation as a budding dictatorship,
hardly a democracy.

It is said of the Quaid-i-Azam that had he wanted to be crowned
a king, the people would have rewarded him with his wish and
would have dutifully shown homage to his command. Although
that may have been true of those who idolized Jinnah, who saw in
him their only hope and future, it was not true for many of the
established local leaders who saw in his awesome powers a zero-
sum game they could not win. Such was the case in the North West
Frontier Province, which had opted for Pakistan in consequence of
a pre-partition plebiscite. Former opponents of the Muslim League
like Abdul Qayyum Khan had joined the party in return for rich
rewards. It was leaders like Abdul Qayyum that brought down the
pro-Congress administration of Dr. Khan Sahib, the brother of
Abdul Ghaffar Khan. Both brothers were staunch foes of the
Muslim League. Each attempted to rally his constituents but they
could not stymie the momentum of the Jinnah-driven Muslim
League. Similar divisions obtained in the Punjab. The Unionist
leader, Khizr Hyat Khan Tiwana, was forced from power by his
Muslim League adversaries Mian Mumtaz Daultana and the Khan
of Mamdot. Political intrigue in Sindhi politics followed a similar
course when Mohammad Ayub Khuhro, the venerable Karachi
leader, fell out of Jinnah’s favor and an aggressive campaign was
launched to separate him from his constituents.

Although the Muslim League had won Pakistan, and Mohammad
Ali Jinnah was celebrated as a vaunted personality, the infighting
between those coveting power and those seeking to protect it
sapped the vitality of the party. Moreover, Jinnah was called to
expend considerable energy in managing internecine squabbling.
This also was true in East Bengal, where the Muslim League had
originated and the party had popular recognition. The Muslim
League had formed the last government before partition, and after
the bifurcation of Bengal a decision had to be made about who
would lead the party in that portion of the province granted to
Pakistan. Personality conflicts in the provinces of the western
region therefore were duplicated in the eastern province. No less
important, following partition the All-India Muslim League split
into two organizations, the Pakistan Muslim League and the India
Muslim League. The All-India Muslim League had been the



Political Aspirations 49

domain of urban leaders, and their cosmopolitan outlook was well
known. The formation of the PakistanMuslim League, by contrast,
had a rural cast of leaders representing feudal interests. Relating to
feudal landlords required gifts even Jinnah did not possess.
Moreover, Jinnah was too burdened by affairs of state to continue
as party president. The latter task was transferred to Chaudhri
Khaliquzzaman, a former member of the Congress Party and a
political refugee from India. Although a loyal Jinnah confidant he
was without roots in the new Pakistan and generally perceived as a
weak personality. Put to the test he could not effectively challenge
the influence of the feudal landlords who quickly came to
dominate the League and use it for their own purposes.

In East Bengal, the picture was different but it too presented a
formidable challenge to Muslim League interests. The last chief
minister of Undivided Bengal was H.S. Suhrawardy, an urbane
Muslim Leaguer and an adroit politician. He had urged Jinnah to
resist the partition of Bengal, pleading with him to retain Calcutta
as an integral part of Pakistan. In the rush to independence, and in
the face of stiff Hindu resistance, however, Jinnah accepted the
British plan to divide and quit. Jinnah had been advised to ignore
Suhrawardy. The former chief minister was accused of promoting
a united and therefore independent Bengal, separate from
Pakistan, to serve his own interests. By poisoning the relationship
between Jinnah and Suhrawardy, the Dacca leaders saw greater
gains for themselves. Indeed, the rivalry between the Dacca-based
Nazimuddin and the Calcutta-based Suhrawardy had intensified
in the years leading up to Pakistan’s independence. Nazimuddin
had preceded Suhrawardy as chief minister in Bengal, only to be
dismissed for malpractice by the reigning British Viceroy.
Nazimuddin was succeeded as chief minister by Suhrawardy,
who successfully revitalized a Bengal ravaged by war and famine.
However, Jinnah, challenged by the colonial power as well as the
Congress Party, ignored that recent history. At the time of
decision, he accepted the partition of Bengal, urged on by the
nawabs of Dacca and knowing they would be the major
beneficiaries. Dacca, therefore, not Calcutta, became the capital
of the new Pakistani Bengal. Suhrawardy, in spite of his election to
the Pakistan Constituent Assembly, was confined to India, banned
from traveling in East Bengal or making speeches in the province.



50 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Forced to resign his membership in the Muslim League,
Suhrawardy was nonetheless determined to remain in politics as
well as gain access to the new Muslim country. In the contest
between Suhrawardy and Nazimuddin, Jinnah chose the weaker,
less capable of the two personalities, but the ramifications of that
decision were little grasped at that particular moment.

Although in declining health, and with a myriad of issues
crowding his agenda, Jinnah was forced to expend much of his
energy in attempts to pacify dissident elements in all the provinces.
He journeyed to the North West Frontier Province and the Punjab
to ask for reconciliation among conflicted local leaders, but with
little if any success. In Sind, he ordered a crackdown on dissident
voices and reserved much of his criticism for Ayub Khuhro, who
was accused of entertaining personal power motives. Jinnah was
even compelled to make the arduous trip to East Bengal, where he
was called to address an aroused population, notably the students,
that claimed a place for the Bengali language alongside that of
Urdu. Jinnah pleaded with the crowd to understand his language
policy and why it was necessary to create a uniform language for a
nation divided by geography as well as culture. Although there
were expressions of willingness to follow the guidance of the
Quaid-i-Azam, in reality the issue was not resolved.

Jinnah governed Pakistan by dint of a determined personality but
it required all his charismatic qualities to hold the nation to the
course he had envisaged long before the creation of the state. Jinnah
wanted Pakistan to become a modern, secular, democratic state,
sustained by the rule of law and popularly supported institutions.
This was the model he presented to the nation when he called for
tolerance between the different religious communities and under-
standing between the provinces. Confronted by an aggressive
Indian neighbor on the one side and a hostile Afghan kingdom on
the other, Jinnah cited the need for a strong center but he also
recognized a need to satisfy local claims for autonomy. The needs
of the center and the periphery would be identified in constitution
making and that responsibility lay with the Constituent Assembly.
He counseled patience as this effort was being launched. He
acknowledged that the work would take time and that reason and
compromise must prevail. Jinnah’s words were important but so
too was his presence.



Political Aspirations 51

Unfortunately for the nation he inspired, Jinnah’s frail body was
consumed by his labors both in achieving independence and in
sustaining the fledgling nation. Weak and desperately in need of
rest he retreated to the Balochistan hills, where he passed the last
weeks of his life. Flown back to Karachi for emergency medical
treatment, he died on September 11, 1948 in a disabled
ambulance not far from the aircraft that had returned him to
the capital city.

The Jinnah legacy

Jinnah’s supreme role in the creation of Pakistan carried over into
the country’s consolidation phase. Pakistan was an idea, or, more
accurately, an experiment. The idea of an independent Muslim
state and the demand voiced by the Muslim League failed to
outline the structure or character of the new entity. Even Jinnah
had failed to explain how a congeries of disparate and relatively
poor territories, housing diverse nationalities, could be forged into
a united nation. Moreover, the speed with which Mountbatten
and Radcliffe divided British India left no time to work through
relationships with the people who held significant, if spatially
circumscribed, dominance in the regions that emerged as Pakistan
in August 1947. Whatever compromises were necessary had to be
reached after the transfer of power and in the midst of
catastrophic events. By accepting the demanding role of head of
state, Jinnah transformed the Governor General’s office from one
of ritual and ceremony to a central institution responsible for the
survival of state and nation. Jinnah was the living embodiment of
Pakistan, the single national personality that demanded attention
from both followers and detractors. As Father of the Nation,
Jinnah was irreplaceable. Nevertheless, within a year following
Pakistan’s independence a successor had to be found. Jinnah’s
mantle was placed on the shoulders of Liaquat Ali Khan. Liaquat
was that yeoman member of the Muslim League who had coaxed
Jinnah to leave his London exile and return to India. Liaquat,
however, was in no way a facsimile of Mohammad Ali Jinnah. A
member of the mohajir or refugee community that had left India
for Pakistan, he was denied a political constituency in his adopted
country. Although he had been named the country’s first Prime



52 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Minister, he was ill-equipped to assume the heavy role of
Pakistan’s supreme leader.

During Jinnah’s brief tenure as Pakistan’s Governor General,
Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan was literally shorn of the power
to administer the needs of his government. Obscured by the
Quaid-i-Azam, he was given the title “Quaid-i-Millet” or “Leader
of the Nation,” but this added little to his powers in dealing with
difficult or alienated personalities in and outside the League.
Jinnah had been so much the center of attention that the
parliamentary institution received little notice. The Constituent
Assembly that doubled as the legislature in fact deferred to the
Quaid in all matters of state. Thus was perpetuated the colonial
tradition wherein the Viceroy dominated all aspects of political
life. Whether deliberate or not, Jinnah’s inability to delegate
effectively reinforced and perpetuated the subcontinent’s viceregal
tradition. The office of the chief executive loomed large over that
of the legislative institution and law making was either made
perfunctory or thwarted by the Governor General, who never
yielded his emergency powers.

Liaquat either failed to give due consideration to the special
powers of the Governor General, or believed he could reduce the
power of the latter office by giving new importance to the
parliamentary institution. After Jinnah’s death, Liaquat chose to
remain Prime Minister, but in the absence of the state’s founder his
government was unprepared for the tasks confronting it. Jinnah
wanted a constitutionally empowered parliament that insured
Pakistan would be a democracy. Liaquat shared that view and in
remaining Prime Minister he knew he had to exorcise the viceregal
tradition. However, he did not have the ties to the power brokers
and he did not have the means with which to neutralize those
planning to maneuver around his authority. Moreover, the regional
leaders controlled powerful constituencies, and even Jinnah’s
attempt to mediate rivalries in Punjab, Sindh, and the North West
Frontier Province had not been successful. Jinnah’s death therefore
was an open invitation to ambitious provincial leaders to challenge
national policy. Liaquat neither possessed the necessary bargaining
skills, nor fully comprehended local issues. Consumed by
constitution making, he held to the belief that a formal contract
between the center and the periphery would allow him to govern.



Political Aspirations 53

Never fully versed in the thinking of the Quaid-i-Azam and
hardly one capable of pressing policies he was uncomfortable
with, Liaquat abdicated much of his power to those he believed
could offset other personal weaknesses. He clothed himself in the
religious tradition and fell victim to those more intent in pursing
particular goals than in bolstering the Prime Minister’s authority.
Thus Liaquat allowed himself to become ensnared in a web of
secular cum religious demands that defined his leadership and
shifted Pakistan to a course avoided by the Quaid-i-Azam.
Jinnah’s secular propensities were virtually ignored. Pakistan
was a country created for Muslims by Muslims who sensed danger
to their circumstances in an India dominated by the Hindu
majority. “Islam in Danger” and Jinnah’s two-nation theory
became the focus for Muslim League claims and policies. Jinnah,
however, framed the Muslim argument in terms of distributing
political power; religious practices were never in jeopardy and he
saw no justification for including Muslim clerics in matters of
governance. Liaquat did not enjoy Jinnah’s acumen or prestige.
Moreover, in the absence of a national constituency and subject to
the pulls of regional strongmen, he judged he had little choice
other than to exaggerate his Islamic goals and enlist the services of
the mullahs.

The Objectives Resolution of 1949 was drafted to frame
Pakistan as a Muslim state. Islam was made the unifying focus for
the citizens of Pakistan and the nation set its constitutional course
to guarantee the country would conform to Muslim teaching and
principles. Secular aspects of nation building were allowed to
recede into the background. Jinnah’s goal of balancing different
nationalities and religions, as well as bridging distant regions, also
was forgotten. Instead, emphasis was given to Pakistan becoming
a model Islamic republic. This turn of events whetted the appetite
of those least responsible for the creation of the independent
nation. Religious orders metamorphosed into political parties and,
even if they counted few joiners on their membership rolls, their
weight in public policy was considerable. The masses, otherwise
apolitical, were hardly unreligious and could be expected to
answer calls expressing their predisposed Muslim identity. Thus,
constitution making was made more difficult by the shift in favor
of Islamic guidelines. Defining a proper Muslim was made the



54 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

central issue in the allocation of power; issues of distributive
justice and representative government became little more than
sideshows.

The Constituent Assembly’s struggle to draft a constitution was
protracted. The Basic Principles Committee issued a report on the
formation of the constitutional system but a common formula did
not materialize. A majority of Pakistan’s population resided in
East Bengal and the latter’s spokesmen insisted on an allocation of
parliamentary seats that reflected its numerical majority. Immedi-
ately, however, the power brokers in the Punjab, citing a larger
contribution to national development, demanded a resolution that
went beyond demographics. Moreover, Punjabis argued that East
Pakistan’s majority was a consequence of the high percentage of
Bengali Hindus in the province. By contrast, the provinces of West
Pakistan had far fewer remaining Hindus. Punjabis also cited their
almost entirely Muslim community following the Sikh population’s
flight to India. If the western Pakistani provinces had more
Muslim residents, then the East Bengal claim to greater
representation was without merit. According to this Islamic
litmus test, East Pakistan was not entitled to majority status in a
future federal parliament. One person one vote did not obtain in
a country guided by Islamic principles and practices, according to
opinion in the western provinces. In East Bengal, however, the
matter was seen differently. More disposed to secular thinking, the
Bengalis saw the attempt to count only Muslims as a tactic aimed
at denying them their basic rights.

This debate was so intense that constitution making could not
proceed. The Punjabi Chief Minister, Mian Mumtaz Daultana,
chided Liaquat on the representation issue and insisted that he
would not approve a report that reduced the level of Punjabi
expression. He demanded that the Prime Minister personally
travel to the Punjab to sell the Basic Principles Report to his
people. Although warned not to travel to the Punjab, Liaquat
believed in the matter so much that he decided to go anyway. That
decision proved fatal. In October 1951, as he rose to speak to an
unruly Punjabi crowd, the Prime Minister was shot and died
almost immediately. Liaquat’s assassin was killed on the spot by a
nearby police officer, making it impossible to learn whether the
murderer had acted alone or was the instrument of a wider



Political Aspirations 55

conspiracy. The immediate consequence of the assassination was
not only the loss of one of the few intimates of the Quaid-i-Azam,
but the virtual collapse of the federal government. Power now
devolved to the provinces, where the traditional patriarchs held
sway and where the Islamists were expected to capitalize on their
recently acquired political leverage.

Hardly four years after achieving independence, Pakistan was
denied both its Quaid-i-Azam and its Quaid-i-Millet. Khwaja
Nazimuddin, who had been ushered to Karachi from Dacca
following Jinnah’s death, had assumed the office of the Governor
General. He was now urged to yield that post and become the
country’s new Prime Minister. Nazimuddin had been Liaquat’s
choice for Governor General because the Prime Minister wanted a
weak head of state who would not interfere with his management
of national affairs. In the time Nazimuddin had served in that
capacity he had in fact followed all the wishes of the Prime
Minister, and as Governor General he had confined his activities to
ceremonial functions. Liaquat’s goal was to depoliticize the office
of the head of state and bring an end to the viceregal tradition.
That goal had not been fully realized at his death. Moreover,
Pakistan harbored individuals who plotted to sustain the power of
the Governor General and it was some of these people who
convinced Nazimuddin to become Prime Minister. In a time of high
crisis, Pakistan did not need so reserved a head of government.
Nor did they require a puppet in the hands of ambitious
personalities. Pakistanis had yet to develop a clear picture of
who they were and where they were heading, but the forces that
shape events are often revealed in the machinations of powerful
individuals and such was the case following Liaquat’s death.

The assassination of Liaquat Ali Khan left Pakistan at a
crossroads. Nazimuddin became the Prime Minister and Ghulam
Mohammad was named Pakistan’s Governor General. The latter
had never been a member of the Muslim League, nor did he
demonstrate a flair for political give and take. A civil servant,
Ghulam Mohammad had had a sterling career as a member of the
Indian financial service. Before partition he had served in
important capacities in India’s nascent industries. Following
independence Jinnah selected him to be Minister of Finance. It
was Ghulam Mohammad who had the major responsibility for



56 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

organizing Pakistan’s treasury and his performance in that
endeavor won him special recognition. Praised by the Quaid,
Ghulam Mohammad looked forward to retirement when his
services were no longer required. Moreover, by 1951, Ghulam
Mohammad was in declining health and, many believed, little able
to manage his work. His selection as Governor General therefore
was a surprise. Although some rationalized he would make a
respectable ceremonial head of state, others saw intrigue in the
juxtaposition of the two men. For all his infirmity, Ghulam
Mohammad was a determined taskmaster and a resolute profes-
sional. Only the naı̈ve could believe the old civil servant would
allow events to swirl around him and not react to them.
Nazimuddin was familiar with Ghulam Mohammad’s lifetime
reputation as a no-nonsense administrator but nevertheless could
not imagine he would intrude himself in parliamentary affairs.
Nazimuddin saw his task as moving constitution making to a
conclusion and he had expected the Governor General to be as
supportive to him as previously he was to the Quaid-i-Azam.
What the Prime Minister failed to realize, however, was that
Ghulam Mohammad, not he, occupied the Quaid’s office.

The Prime Minister confronted a mountain of unresolved issues,
the contours of which became quickly apparent. A native Bengali,
Nazimuddin was burdened by the language question that Jinnah
had attempted to arrest in his hurried visit to East Bengal in 1948.
Bengalis were among the more politically aroused elements of the
Pakistan population and considerable passion was displayed in the
effort to have Bangla established as a national language alongside
Urdu. Jinnah had insisted on a single national language and had
argued the case for Urdu in a country of many tongues. Apparently,
Jinnah’s death was a time for the Bengalis to re-energize their
demand for more autonomy and greater cultural recognition, and
although Liaquat chose to ignore Bengali sentiments, Nazimuddin
could not. Nazimuddin traveled to Dacca not long after becoming
Prime Minister and was called upon to make an important speech
on the Paltan Maidan, a great open area in the heart of the city.
Reading from a prepared text, he came upon the matter of the
national language and reiterated Jinnah’s declaration that the
country could afford only one national tongue and that it had long
been a settled fact that it would be Urdu. His Bengali audience



Political Aspirations 57

could not believe that one of their own would speak so
dispassionately about a matter so close to the hearts of those
residing in the eastern province. The crowd registered their
disfavor almost immediately and the Prime Minister had to endure
a volley of criticism.

Nazimuddin later would argue that he had not read the speech
before making it and that the language question had only been
mentioned in the context of so many other challenges needing
resolution. Although the Prime Minister sought to quickly
distance himself from his own words, his explanation went
unheeded. Indeed, it was those very words that the enemies of the
Muslim League in East Bengal intended to use against him. Riots
broke out in several areas of Dacca even before the Prime Minister
could return to his residence in Karachi. The demonstrators
labeled the Prime Minister a traitor to Bengal and its beloved
culture. With the students in the vanguard of the protest, assaults
were made on business and government structures in the city. The
provincial Muslim League government of Nurul Amin was
unsuccessful in preventing the anger from escalating, and when
the police were called upon to respond to the protesters the
violence intensified and was protracted over several days. Before
calm could be restored, several students of Dacca University lay
dead, the university was ordered closed, and the students were
forced to retreat to their homes, many to distant villages scattered
throughout the province. Word now spread that the Muslim
League government had murdered scores of students and had
turned its back on the Bengali complaint. Although this was an
exaggeration, there was no mistaking the level of mayhem, and an
aroused public turned to anti-Muslim-League politicians who
were pleased to represent their sentiments.

Bengali nationalism was born on February 21, 1952, the day
that marked the start of the Bengali language movement. Always
thereafter known as “Shahid” or “Martyrs’ Day,” the students
would celebrate the event each year. A monument was later erected
outside the gates of Dacca University and that place became the
central venue for the politicized student community that in time
led the call for secession from Pakistan. More immediately,
however, the language riots exposed the weakness in the
Nazimuddin administration. If Nazimuddin could not maintain



58 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

law and order among his own people, how could he be expected to
manage the diverse population in the western provinces. Ghulam
Mohammad and those who served him had concluded that
Pakistan was little suited to parliamentary democracy, that its
largely illiterate and divided population could not be melded into
a unified nation, and that it would take extraordinary efforts
to sustain the state. Jinnah’s vision could not be translated into
reality. Much attention centered on the actions of the country’s
politicians. Ghulam Mohammad was only one of many from the
civil–military establishment to question their role. The higher
administration questioned the politicians’ acceptance of the
national idea, and sensed the need to sustain the “steel frame”
of colonial government in the face of what they judged to be
divisive forces.

The “steel frame” included the civil administration and the
army, the twin pillars that had supported British authority in India.
Professional by calling as well as training and experience, it also
represented the modernists in the Pakistan experience. Focused on
the maintenance of law and order, the members of the civil–
military establishment made themselves the holders of the Quaid’s
flame. The country had survived the initial years after partition as a
consequence of their labors and dedication, and they now
discerned a vast distance between themselves and the country’s
politicians, who for the most part were perceived as overly
ambitious and venal. Moreover, members of the higher adminis-
tration were wedded to the secular state and at every opportunity
had sought to separate religion from politics. Acknowledging that
the country was born into a world of expanding nation-states,
Pakistani administrators and soldiers understood that the country’s
sectarian and ethnic problems could be exploited by the very
people who had rejected Jinnah’s quest for Pakistan. This concern
deepened in the months following the Bengal language riots.

The violence factor

Unrest was sparked in the Punjab by the Majlis-i-Ahrar-i-Islam,
supported by the Jamaat-i-Islami. The target of the religious
organizations was the Ahmediyya community that resided in the
province. The Ahrars opposed the Ahmediyya for what they



Political Aspirations 59

claimed was a heretical position on Islam. Based in India and
aligned with the Congress Party before partition, the Ahrars had
described Pakistan as “palidistan,” the “land of the filthy.” The
Jamaat, also an Indian organization, and under the leadership of
Maulana Maudoodi, used similar words to describe the country
of Jinnah’s creation. Following independence, both organizations
shifted their operations to Pakistan, however, and their criticism of
the country’s leaders and political system became a familiar refrain
in the early years of the new state. Now, however, they aimed
to shift the public’s attention to their position, and their assault on
the Ahmediyya was aimed at gaining adherents, as well as
weakening and possibly bringing down the central government.

There was sufficient public distaste for the Ahmediyya, given
their apparent questioning of Mohammad’s role as the “Seal of the
Prophets.” The Ahmediyya were followers of one Ghulam Ahmed,
a nineteenth-century Punjabi who claimed a form of revelation.
Although Ghulam Ahmad’s preachings were considered blasphe-
mous by devout Muslims, the colonial authority had protected the
Ahmediyya and had found its followers eager to pursue English
educational opportunities. As a consequence, trained Ahmediyya
were recruited for various forms of government service and when
Pakistan became independent a number of them had attained high
positions in the army, the bureaucracy, and the professions.
Pakistan’s first foreign minister was an Ahmediyya, Zafrullah
Khan, who had been knighted by the Crown and had a
distinguished career as a public official. Therefore when the riots
broke out, much of the mob’s venom focused on the high profile of
Sir Zafrullah Khan.

The Ahrar and Jamaat leaders insisted that the government
remove the Foreign Minister. They also called for the termination
of Ahmediyya positions in the government, the army, and the civil
bureaucracy. As tensions increased, the Punjab Muslim League,
under the leadership of Mian Mumtaz Daultana, welcomed the
assistance of the Islamists who had given the party their support in
the 1951 provincial elections. And because Daultana refused to
bring calm to the province or protect the Ahmediyya, Prime
Minister Nazimuddin was drawn into the controversy. A pious
Muslim, Nazimuddin’s sympathies were thought to be with the
Islamists, but as head of government he was duty bound to defend



60 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

public order. Caught between his personal convictions and official
responsibility, Nazimuddin hesitated before taking the actions
needed to address the problem. Without a popular base in western
Pakistan and repudiated in his own province, Nazimuddin feared
losing still another constituency. The Ahrars had merged forces
with a number of fundamentalist orders and had joined with the
Muslim Parties Convention in calling for the excommunication of
the Ahmediyya. Nazimuddin was personally sympathetic to these
remonstrations and thus a reluctant enforcer of law and order. His
decision to arrest the more radical and violent members of the
religious community in Karachi was considered a desperate move,
forced on him by the Governor General. But the real problem was
in the Punjab, not Karachi. Protests had reached a critical stage,
and Chief Minister Daultana again refused to act against the law
breakers, arguing that grievances against the Ahmediyya were a
popular issue.

Given this government indecision or complicity, the Punjab riots
began officially on February 27, 1953, spearheaded by the
fundamentalists but assisted by a wide array of the Punjabi
public, drawn from both the educated as well as the illiterate
classes. Karachi remained relatively quiet as a consequence of
central government actions, but the widespread killing and
destruction of property in the Punjab could not be ignored.
Nazimuddin was forced to make an emergency visit to Lahore,
where he forced the resignation of the Chief Minister, ordered the
banning of many of the participant religious parties, and arrested
hundreds of perpetrators. The Prime Minister nevertheless had not
acted until the rioters had destroyed much of the province’s vital
infrastructure. Accused of hesitation and sympathy with the
miscreants, Nazimuddin was forced to explain his consorting with
the instigators of the disturbances.

The Punjab riots had brought into public view the Prime
Minister’s problems in managing the government. Nazimuddin’s
role in the Punjab riots was scrutinized, but so too was his decision
to enlist the services of the ulema in constitution making. The
latter decision had allowed the clerics to play an obstructionist
role that further delayed the process. The country had also
experienced significant economic dislocation, and with the
devastation in the Punjab, Pakistan’s declining economy could



Political Aspirations 61

not be successfully addressed. Economic stagnation and political
decay had raised questions about the politicians’ capacity to
govern; it also prompted the bureaucrats to revisit their history as
the subcontinent’s rulers. Impatient with the political bickering
and the failure to place country above personal aspirations, the
riots in the Punjab and Bengal were traced to political intrigue that
if not checked could destroy the Pakistan experiment. Higher civil
administrators noted the rise in social and religious tension and
the inability of law enforcement to prevent anti-state behavior.
Law and order could only be restored in the Punjab after the
imposition of martial law, and future disturbances would no
doubt call for similar measures. The civil–military establishment
saw itself in a pivotal role. Pakistan needed saving from itself.

Governor General Ghulam Mohammad demanded that Nazi-
muddin purge his government. When Nazimuddin hesitated,
Ghulam Mohammad dismissed the Prime Minister and his entire
cabinet. Nazimuddin was not given opportunity to seek a vote of
confidence in the legislature, and on April 17, 1953 all of Pakistan
came under a limited form of civilian martial law. The viceregal
tradition was resurrected along with the authoritarian trappings of
the former colonial administration. Ghulam Mohammad’s actions
received the support of the country’s armed forces, notably the
head of the army, General Mohammad Ayub Khan, the Defense
Secretary, Iskandar Mirza, and the Secretary General of the Civil
Service, Chaudhri Mohammad Ali. Muslim League officials were
appalled by the action and immediately appealed to the Pakistani
judiciary. The judiciary’s silence, however, allowed the assembling
of a new cabinet, headed by the Pakistani ambassador to the
United States, Mohammad Ali Bogra. Bogra’s choice hinted at
other moves by the civil–military establishment to link Pakistan
more intimately with the United States. Indeed, Bogra had been
working with General Ayub Khan and Defense Secretary Iskandar
Mirza in a behind-the-scenes effort to secure American arms for
the Muslim nation. Bogra had found the new Eisenhower
government amenable to Pakistani overtures and both Vice-
President Richard Nixon and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles
were eager to assemble a cold war defensive alliance that stretched
from Turkey to Pakistan. Bogra therefore found the Americans
little concerned about the course of Pakistani politics and more



62 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

than willing to do business with a Pakistan government that
represented the views of Pakistan’s civil–military complex.

The demise of the Muslim League

The Muslim League had suffered serious damage with the ouster
of the Nazimuddin government, but the party faced another test
when provincial elections were scheduled in East Bengal in 1954.
The party had lost its popularity in the eastern province and was
confronted with challenges from other organizations that lacked
national appeal but nevertheless represented local sentiment.
Moreover, after the deaths of Jinnah and Liaquat, the Muslim
League had become prey to ambitious, self-aggrandizing members
of the political fraternity. The language issue weighed heavily on
Muslim League leaders and Chief Minister Nurul Amin had
refused to hold by-elections for vacant seats, lest the party expose
its weakness. Thus, the announcement of province-wide elections
had energized the opposition’s determination to put an end to
Muslim League rule. The nature of the opposition challenge was
signaled by the formation of a United Front.

The Front combined all the principal opposition organizations
and their respective leaders. Most prominent were Fazlul Huq and
H.S. Suhrawardy. The former had moved the Lahore (Pakistan)
Resolution in 1940 and the latter had been theMuslim League’s last
chief minister of undivided Bengal. Both men had left the League
and had to withstand attacks from their erstwhile colleagues. But
they also had developed impressive followings and were respected
leaders. Suhrawardy had been blocked from participating in
Pakistani politics and efforts had been made to prevent him from
making public appearances. Though he was arrested on several
occasions, his determination to challenge the Muslim League
leadership was undiminished. Suhrawardy was instrumental in the
creation of the urban-based Awami League in 1949, and with the
deaths of Jinnah and Liaquat, he envisaged an opportunity to build
a new national partnership. The first major test of his organiza-
tional skills was the 1954 East Bengal elections. Fazlul Huq had
labored on behalf of Bengali workers and peasants long before the
independence of Pakistan, and his party, the Krishak Sramik
(formerly the Krishak Praja), was especially strong in the villages of



Political Aspirations 63

East Bengal. Together Suhrawardy and Huq represented the most
formidable challenge to Muslim League influence in the province.

Fazlul Huq and Suhrawardy led the United Front and their
combined strategy succeeded beyond all their expectations. The
Muslim League was demolished at the polls. The opposition
secured 309 seats in the provincial legislature to a paltry ten for
the Muslim League. The election in the only province where the
Muslim League was judged native to the soil proved the final
undoing of the party that had won Pakistan. With the civil–
military bureaucracy dominating the party at the center and with
provincial politicians vying for power in the western provinces,
the termination of Muslim League rule in East Bengal pointed
Pakistan in a new direction. In effect the break-up of the Muslim
League ended the fiction of a unified polity. The Muslim League
had been more a movement than a political party. Personalized by
Jinnah, it forced the British to create an independent Pakistan, but
the Pakistan that ultimately emerged from Muslim League efforts
was never the vision of its principal founder. The regions that
comprised the Pakistani nation were too disparate, too disrupted
by the manner of the partition, to fit into a design reflecting
national identity and collective purpose. Pakistan was an idea that
was yet to be realized. Nonetheless, too much had been invested in
its formation for the enterprise to be abandoned. If the political
elements were unprepared for the challenge of nation building, the
steel frame of colonial administration was eager to press ahead
with the notion that the country was a reality and therefore had to
be made viable.

Maintaining the fiction of a Muslim League party at the center
of national affairs while the country was clearly rejecting the party
at the grassroots became the task of the higher bureaucracy with
assistance from the Pakistan army. The legitimacy of the bureau-
cratic putsch was made manifest in this exercise. But the politicians
were not prepared to yield to the members of the colonial legacy.
Sensing the need to curtail the powers of the center, especially the
office of the Governor General, the politicians developed a
strategy that they believed would enhance their influence and
neutralize the administrators. Unrest in East Bengal, however,
stymied these efforts. When the United Front was in the process of
forming a government for East Bengal, labor unrest shattered the



64 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

peace and, because of the heavy loss of life and destruction of
property, the central government intervened. Fazlul Huq was in
Calcutta during these events and, thanks to the nostalgia of
returning to familiar haunts, he exchanged kind words with his
Indian hosts. On returning to Dacca he found himself the target of
opposition abuse, while members of the central government called
his actions and statements in India treasonous. Because he had not
prevented the rioting in the province’s nascent industries and had
demonstrated “questionable” loyalty to Pakistan the central
government proceeded to nullify the election results and to
impose martial law throughout East Bengal. The United Front
government was dissolved even before it could officially be sworn
in, and Iskandar Mirza was sent to the province and authorized to
assume dictatorial powers. The Bengali population offered little
resistance despite knowing that the heavy hand of West Pakistani
interests had been laid upon them. No friend of the Muslim
League, Mirza also opposed the leaders of the United Front. A
point man for the civil–military power in Karachi, Mirza intended
to guide the eastern province along lines that encouraged the
maintenance of national unity, even if that meant suspending all
fundamental guarantees of citizenship.

The objective of the civil administrators was a reformed Muslim
League without politicians. Jinnah had transcended the party and
had neutralized the politicians. The higher administrators saw no
reason why they could not emulate that example, especially given
the miserable track record of those who would clothe themselves
in the Quaid-i-Azam’s mantle. The collapse of Muslim League rule
in East Bengal, soon to be re-designated “East Pakistan,” meant
the party could no longer pretend it was the country’s preferred
political organization. Although Jinnah’s and Liaquat’s images
would continue to appear, and their words and statements to be
repeated ad nauseam, the Muslim League they had nurtured
ceased to be a real actor in the nation’s public life. With the
passing of the League went the loss of several objectives. National
unity ceased to be a political enterprise, and, even more important,
no party was available to help bridge the gulf between the Islamist
and more fundamentalist members of the population and those
who envisaged a modern nation based on Western principles of
pluralism and open debate.



Political Aspirations 65

The political organizations that succeeded the Muslim League
were too provincial or tooweak to represent the diverse regions that
comprised Pakistan. Nor were the politicians, perhaps with the
exception of Suhrawardy, gifted in national politics. Pakistan was
an inchoate dream at the time of independence, and only a small
minority grasped the significance of national existence. TheMuslim
League’s major task was to educate the masses about political life in
the middle of the twentieth century. Time and patience were
required to socialize a polyglot and unsophisticated people into a
union of unknown character. TheMuslim League hadwon Pakistan
on the theme “Islam in Danger,” and was called to make a bridge
between the traditionalMuslim world and the new times that spoke
to the masses in progressive, secular terms. In the immediate
aftermath of World War II, attention centered on reconstruction.
Fascism had been defeated and the language of democracy and
material progress dominated expression and purpose. For the new
state of Pakistan the challenge was not only how to fit itself into a
constellation of states determined to achieve new levels of physical
well-being, but how to build a state that embodied all the properties
of the most advanced nations. This was the challenge presented to
the Muslim League. Viewed from a historical perspective, it was
obviously impossible for a party re-engineered by Mohammad Ali
Jinnah in the late 1930s to achieve such an aim.

Jinnah’s passing only a year following partition had left the
Muslim League without a true leader. Liaquat was made of lesser
stuff and his assassination in the midst of controversy over
constitution making merely emphasized this point. Without
Jinnah’s firm hand the Muslim League could not hold to the
agenda established for it by the transfer of power. Pakistan’s
political elite lacked the stature to carry Jinnah’s message forward.
Their reference to Jinnah’s intentions was an attempt to cover
their inadequacies, not to elevate or sanctify their mission. These
circumstances led the civil–military establishment to assume
Jinnah’s mantle and thereby leadership of the Muslim League.
But in taking control of the party they also denied the Muslim
League’s legitimate right to speak for the people of Pakistan. In
time the bureaucracy would find it difficult to accommodate a
political calling. The politicians would again assert themselves,
but never again would they have the opportunity to demonstrate



66 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

their inclusive goals. Not only did the politicians fail to make the
transition from regional to national politics, but the religious
orders were given their opportunity to demonstrate that they too
could play at politics.

When the politicians moved against the Governor General
following the elections in East Bengal and attempted to curtail the
powers of the office, Ghulam Mohammad was hardly prepared to
grant them their demands. The head of state, utilizing his viceregal
authority, notably Section 92A of the Government of India Act of
1935, argued that the Constituent Assembly threatened the well-
being of the nation and he took the unprecedented step of
dissolving the body. The Constituent Assembly had been elected
before partition for the express purpose of drafting a constitution.
It had not done so. Having already dismissed a sitting Prime
Minister, Ghulam Mohammad was not about to allow an
assembly, essentially composed of Muslim Leaguers, to undermine
the state, especially when the party had already lost control of the
constituent units that made up the state. Although the speaker of
the Constituent Assembly brought the matter before the High
Court seeking a reversal, the court refused to accommodate the
plea. Nazimuddin had earlier brought his dismissal before the
Queen but Her Royal Highness had ignored that request for a
review. The High Court’s action in rejecting the plea to sustain the
constitution-making body proved a final blow. Pakistan became
the responsibility of the civil–military bureaucracy. The bureaucrats
would continue to play at politics for several years thereafter but
in the end it would be the Pakistan army that would assume the
governance of the nation.

Bibliography
Ahmad, Hazrat Mirza Bashir-ud-Din Mahmud, Ahmadiyyat or the True

Islam, Rabwah, Pakistan: Ahmadiyya Muslim Foreign Mission Office,
1959.

Ahmad, Ziauddin, Liaquat Ali Khan: Leader and Statesman, Karachi:
Oriental Committee, 1971.

Ali, Chaudhri Muhammad, The Emergence of Pakistan, Lahore:
Research Society of Pakistan, 1973.

Aziz, K.K., Party Politics in Pakistan, 1947–1958, Islamabad: National
Commission on Historical Research, 1976.



Political Aspirations 67

Callard, Keith, Pakistan: A Political Study, London: George Allen &
Unwin, 1957.

Chaudhuri, M.A., The Civil Service in Pakistan, Dacca: National Institute
of Public Administration, 1963.

Choudhury, G.W., Constitutional Development in Pakistan, 2nd edn,
London: Longman, 1969.

Dil, Anwar and Dil, Afia, Bengali Language Movement to Bangladesh,
Lahore: Ferozsons, 2000.

Goodnow, Henry Frank, The Civil Service of Pakistan: Bureaucracy in a
New Nation, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1964.

Government of Pakistan, Report of the Court of Inquiry, Punjab
Disturbances of 1953, Lahore: Government Printing: Punjab, 1954.

Hardy, P., The Muslims of British India, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1972.

Human Relations Area Files, Pakistan: Government and Politics,
Berkeley: University of California, 1956.

Jamaat-i-Islami, An Analysis of the Munir Report, Karachi: Pakistan
Herald Press, 1956.

Khaliquzzaman, Choudhry, Pathway to Pakistan, Lahore: Longman,
1961.

Khuhro, Hamida, Mohammad Ayub Khuhro: A Life of Courage in
Politics, Lahore: Ferozsons, 1998.

Qureshi, Ishtiaq Husain, The Struggle for Pakistan, Karachi: University of
Karachi Press, 1963.

Von Vorys, Karl, Political Development in Pakistan, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1965.

Wilcox, Wayne Ayres, Pakistan: The Consolidation of a Nation, New
York: Columbia University Press, 1963.



3
THE MILITARY AND POLITICS

The transfer of power established Pakistan as a parliamentary
democracy but no consideration was given to its colonial history
or its traditional background. Pakistan evolved from a history
long involved with authoritarian modes of governance. Medieval
rule, patriarchy, and monarchy permeated the region. The years
immediately before partition had offered little hint of democratic
norms and processes. The war years, and the brief period following
them, had hardly introduced modern, sophisticated institutions
and systems of self-government. The British never seriously
tutored their subjects in the art of responsible government; nor
were the people who were sent to rule the subcontinent given that
charge. Law and order was the essential requirement of colonial
administration and by most measures that objective was realized.
The British departure from the subcontinent was by all standards
peaceful and orderly. The same could not be said for what the
colonial authority left behind.

The transfer of power was an action demanded by the events
following the close of World War II. Britain saw little value in
holding on to a territory that demanded more of its resources
than it had left to expend following the termination of hostilities
in Europe. Quit and run, and divide and quit was the easiest way
out of a messy set of circumstances. Little time and less thought
were given to the consequences of the rapid British departure.

68



The Military and Politics 69

Whereas the new independent Indian Union rested its immediate
future on an established structure and a relatively unified political
organization, Pakistan had only Mohammad Ali Jinnah and the
semblance of a political body that superficially represented the
larger nation.

Given the expectations at the time of Pakistan’s independence,
all references to democratic process were at best the individual
ruminations of people in and outside the region. It is doubtful
anyone seriously pondered the task of building a nation-state
whose purpose was serious democratic expression. Moreover,
although Pakistan was achieved as a consequence of emotional
pressures that reflected Muslim sentiment, none of the country’s
leaders had seriously considered the compatibility of Islamic
practice and secular society. Jinnah, virtually alone, became the
exponent of constitution making along secular lines. His vision
involved the blending of multiple traditions, in particular the
Islamic experience with those at variance with it. Jinnah addressed
the pressing need to build a civil society, but he never developed a
strategy for the merger of Muslims, Hindus, Sikhs, and Christians,
let alone the integration of Bengalis with Punjabis, Pashtuns,
Sindhis, Balochis, and the myriad of refugees flooding into the
state from India. Moreover, by Jinnah’s own insistence, Pakistan
had been created from the demand that Muslims were a separate
nation and therefore entitled to an independent homeland.
Ordinary people could not be faulted if they believed Pakistan
would allow them to live and dream as members of an exclusive
faith. To argue after partition, as Jinnah did, that Pakistanis were
neither Muslim nor Hindu nor Sikh, but citizens of an all-
embracing secular state, had little meaning for the vast majority
who now were expected to adopt a Pakistani identity.

The colonial authority may have departed the area with the
bands playing and the flags flying, but for the people of the
subcontinent partition was a wrenching and tragic experience.
Much of the region was bathed in blood as communal warfare
pitted rival communities against one another. The unleashing of
the apocalypse rained havoc on peoples who had sustained an
equilibrium under alien tutelage. Law and order were quickly
made relics of the past as neighbor assaulted neighbor, and those
who could flee did so in huge numbers. The millions of refugees



70 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

created in the immediate aftermath of partition confirmed the
enormous gap between intention and reality, between vision and
probability.

For Pakistan it was clear from the outset that the country would
emerge as a parochial state or die in the initial months following
the transfer of power. Jinnah’s vision of a secular state could not
be articulated, let alone adopted, by the politicians who succeeded
him on his death. Moreover, war in Kashmir between India and
Pakistan and the failure to bring an end to that conflict sealed the
fate of the democratic experiment even before it could be tested.
Too much of the Muslim psyche was focused on the territory of
Kashmir and from the beginning successive Pakistan governments
would be measured by their commitment to liberating the
Kashmiri Muslims from the clutches of the Hindus. Kashmir
became the religious symbol, the litmus test for governments
seeking legitimacy in an inchoate and deeply divided and troubled
state. Pakistan as a secular state seemed doomed to failure even
before the independent country could establish its bona fides.

‘Therefore, even though Jinnah’s death within a year after
partition produced some expectation that an orderly and
representative political systemmight be attempted, that expectation
soon became a dim prospect. After the “Great Leader,” establish-
ing a viable political system, even in a state dominated by one
party, proved elusive. Jinnah’s vision had called for the establish-
ment of a constitutional order but constitution making was
impossible among rival regional interests that were more inclined
to protect their peculiar domains than construct a viable state.
Unable to reconcile their different claims and sensing a loss of
personal power, the politicians that inherited the Pakistan state
favored their own more limited purposes and allowed the nation
to grope for its own ill-defined destiny. Political failure was
written large in the civil–military actions that were aimed at
preserving the country’s territorial integrity. Challenged by hostile
neighbors on the North West Frontier as well as in India and
Kashmir, the nascent Pakistan army assumed primary responsibility
for the country’s preservation. And with the changing of the
guard, the army came under indigenous leadership. As Pakistan’s
first Muslim army commander, General Mohammad Ayub Khan
was given the role of chief defender of the Pakistan nation.



The Military and Politics 71

External defense, however, could not be achieved without a
modicum of internal stability. The bureaucratic intrusion into the
nation’s political life that followed the assassination of Liaquat Ali
Khan therefore was not unexpected.

The army leaders watched as the bureaucrats attempted to
bolster the failing Muslim League by assuming positions in the
party and the federal cabinet. Power sharing between politicians
and public officials, however, proved a hopeless exercise. When
the administrators moved to monopolize political power, the
military establishment did not interfere. Nazimuddin’s ouster from
the Prime Minister’s office was prelude to the dissolution of
the Constituent Assembly, and the latter event virtually ended the
parliamentary experiment. Although the High Court upheld
the Governor General’s dissolution order, it nevertheless called
for a continuation of the constitution-making process, and a new
Constituent Assembly, one more representative of prevailing
political conditions, was assembled. Under pressure of the civil–
military establishment, the Second Constituent Assembly wasted
little time in writing a document that gave parity of representation
between the two wings of the country, but not before the provinces
of western Pakistan were amalgamated into “One Unit.”

One Unit was a purely bureaucratic enterprise. It overrode
western Pakistan’s multiethnic base and was aimed at depriving
the provincial politicians of their significant influence. Moreover,
in creating one administrative province from the original four, the
civil–military institution believed it could ease east–west antagon-
ism and hence nurture national unity. One Unit as policy therefore
was little debated and was approved in record time.

In the course of these events Ghulam Mohammad’s health took
a drastic turn. In what was little less than a civil coup, the country
was placed in the hands of a “Cabinet of Talents.” That cabinet
included the nation’s most powerful public officials. Iskandar
Mirza left his autocratic office in East Pakistan to take up
leadership of the body. Chaudhri Mohammad Ali, the Secretary
General of the civil service, General Mohammad Ayub Khan,
the head of the army, and H.S. Suhrawardy, the leader of the
dominant opposition party in East Pakistan and the only Bengali
with a claim to national recognition, were the other important
players. Mirza quickly replaced the ailing Ghulam Mohammad as



72 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Governor General and Chaudhri Mohammad Ali was named the
country’s new Prime Minister when the influential Punjabi leader,
Mushtaque Ahmad Gurmani, vetoed Suhrawardy’s candidacy for
the latter position. Placing themselves at the heart of the decision-
making process, the higher bureaucracy truly believed they could
not only save the nation, but steer it on a course they imagined
Jinnah had intended.

The bureaucrats had little success in filling the political vacuum.
Nevertheless, under their aegis constitution making was accelerated
and with the deliberations of the Second Constituent Assembly a
draft constitution was approved against only token opposition.
Promulgated in 1956, it was now the responsibility of the civil
servants to bring the constitution into force. Chaudhri Mohammad
Ali, however, could not meet this test and he was forced to step
aside and allow H.S. Suhrawardy to assume the office of Prime
Minister. As Law Minister, Suhrawardy had played a leading role
in completing the constitution. He also was a seasoned veteran
politician. Nonetheless, he had been drummed out of the Muslim
League following partition, and thus considerable opposition
challenged his administration. Suhrawardy tried to reconcile his
detractors but he also addressed the hard issues, among them the
contradictions in the Pakistan paradigm that pitted secularists
against fundamentalists and vice versa. Suhrawardy also
attempted to bridge the growing rift between the two wings of
the country, and sought an appropriate distribution of development
funds among the provinces. Nothing he did, however, quieted the
criticism leveled against him. Assaults on his administration
emanated from all quarters, but especially from remnants of the
West Pakistan Muslim League, as well as from his own Bengali-
based Awami League, which believed he had made too many
compromises and was not sufficiently firm in representing Bengali
interests.

Although the new constitution officially described Pakistan as
an “Islamic Republic,” and had been approved by the Constituent
Assembly, few were satisfied, and the majority of opposition
politicians found much to complain about. Many labeled the
document unworkable or designed to perpetuate the power of
the civil–military establishment. Reinforced in their views when
Iskandar Mirza became Pakistan’s first President, they cited the



The Military and Politics 73

chief executive’s special prerogatives and that nothing had been
done to eliminate the powers associated with the viceregal
tradition. Moreover, the office of the Prime Minister was made
subordinate to that of the President and Suhrawardy’s tenure as
Prime Minister was never based upon parliamentary support but
rather upon the extent to which his administration satisfied
President Iskandar Mirza. To emphasize this point, Mirza made it
clear to dissenters that he had little patience with them and would
use the powers of his office to silence them whenever he judged it
necessary.

The road to martial law

Iskandar Mirza was the embodiment of a secular leader but his
views had little to do with Jinnah’s vision. Mirza was the
subcontinent’s first Muslim to be trained at the Imperial Military
Academy at Sandhurst. Born in West Bengal of Persian ancestry,
he was descended from a line of soldiers but upon graduation he
chose the civil rather than military service. Appointed a political
officer on the North West Frontier, Mirza had represented the
colonial authority in the tribal area on the border with
Afghanistan. Known for his strong demeanor and no-nonsense
administrative style, his reputation had gained the attention of
those in the highest political circles when Pakistan became a
reality. Made Defense Secretary, Mirza joined with General
Mohammad Ayub Khan when the latter assumed command of
the Pakistan army. The two men shared their thoughts about the
needs of the new state and came to a common understanding on
the course the nation must follow.

Mirza displayed little patience with politicians, had been a close
observer of the politics in the different regions, and was most
concerned with the ongoing rivalry between combative political
organizations. Believing that political conflict only added to the
state’s weakness, President Mirza was determined to maneuver the
politicians toward common goals or nullify their actions
altogether. Although General Ayub’s sentiments were similar, he
wanted more time to establish the army as an acknowledged
fighting force and hence left the political strategizing to his
colleague. Mirza was a staunch believer in the nation-state and



74 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

verbally abused those who showed less than total commitment.
He was particularly outspoken in his criticism of the cleric-
politicians because they had insisted on framing the public
discourse in theological terms. For Mirza, there was no question
that sovereignty was a man-made phenomenon and that references
to God’s sovereignty, as in the Objectives Resolution of 1949, only
served to confuse as well as divide the nation. Religion, he argued,
was a personal matter, and he refused to yield to those who
claimed to speak for God and thereby justified their limited
support for the state. A Mirza quote appearing in the New York
Times on February 7, 1955 appeared to sum up his thinking on
this matter: “We can’t run wild on Islam; it is Pakistan first and
last.”

Mirza and Ayub were Muslims who did not need others to define
their faith. Both found reasons to reject those who legitimated their
actions through religious pronouncements to a blind following. The
Punjab riots were too fresh to ignore and they had revealed how
negative statements directed against people professing different
belief systems could degenerate into social unrest and widespread
mayhem. That there were divisive elements in Pakistan’s body
public came as no surprise, but leaders of a nation-state were
expected to transcend personal preferences and work toward the
greater good. For Mirza, and no less so Ayub, the first imperative
lay in promoting national unity, even if that meant curtailing the
activities of religious zealots. Pakistan had been only an idea for
Mohammad Ali Jinnah. Hindus represented the most vocal
opposition in the struggle to achieve an independent Muslim state,
but they were hardly the only ones. Muslims too had questioned the
utility of a state that claimed to speak for the Muslims of the
subcontinent, especially if that state was interpreted as serving
colonial interests. The Islamists of the pre-independence era were
more focused on the need to deny Western and especially European
influence than they were on promoting an Islamic polity. Hence
their general support for the Indian National Congress and their
disapproval of Jinnah’s tactics. Looked at in the context of
Pakistan’s prehistory, it was Jinnah and the Muslim League, no
matter how secular their vision, who reflected Muslim aspirations.
But that was so much history. For both Mirza and Ayub,
accustomed to working with people across cultures, and having



The Military and Politics 75

been trained to protect and defend the sovereign state, account-
ability, not religious commitment, was the primary standard.

The constitutional debate centering on the sovereignty question
framed the problem faced by Mirza and those identifying with his
administration. The Objectives Resolution had focused attention
on the central issue behind the Pakistan Movement, no matter
how muted by the Quaid-i-Azam. Pakistan had been created to
give political expression to a new nation inhabited predominantly
by Muslims. How the new citizen of Pakistan related to the
national ethos was heavily influenced by their religious affiliation
and the question loomed large of who spoke for Islam in a
government insisting on civic virtues and secular processes. The
issue went beyond politics to the matter of legal structures and
popular representation. The sovereignty of state and people lost
significance in the affirmation of belief. Monotheism is not only an
all-encompassing principle, it also establishes the connection
between God and humankind. God’s will is eternal and
immutable. Human law is frail, temporary, and always subject
to challenge. God delegates sovereignty to mortal human beings,
but God’s will is not subject to challenge. In the end, therefore,
Pakistan’s 1956 constitution accepted the sovereignty of God, but
temporal issues, in particular who should govern, were left to the
ministrations of fallible men.

Mirza was such a fallible man. Unhappy with the need to accept
the parliamentary system, he acceded to the pressures imposed
by the constitution. He yielded to the need to play at politics by
surrounding himself with strong personalities who could be
expected to act in accordance with his ideas. His choice for the
leadership of the new One Unit of West Pakistan was the frontier
leader and opponent of the Muslim League, Dr. Khan Sahib.
Mirza pulled another rabbit out of his hat when in September
1956, with the collaboration of Dr. Khan Sahib and the Punjabi
Mushtaque Ahmed Gurmani, he prompted the formation of the
Republican Party. Chaudhri Mohammad Ali, the Prime Minister,
had also assumed the presidency of the Muslim League, and when
he learned that many of the larger Punjabi landlords had resigned
membership in his party in order to join the Republicans, he
accused Mirza of betrayal. In the end, Mohammad Ali quit his
post in the Muslim League and resigned the office of Prime



76 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Minister. Suhrawardy was named to succeed as Prime Minister,
but Sardar Abdur Rab Nishtar had gained control of the Muslim
League. Mirza was determined to neutralize Nishtar, however,
whom he believed would lead the party into the arms of religious
radicals. Allying with the secular Suhrawardy was therefore seen
as creating the necessary coalition between the West Pakistani
Republicans and East Pakistan’s Awami League. The alliance
seemed to satisfy Suhrawardy’s long quest for true parity between
the two wings of Pakistan. But both Suhrawardy and especially
Mirza saw it as sustaining Pakistan’s experiment in secular nation
building. Moreover, it appeared to make the Muslim League even
more irrelevant.

Mirza’s calculations, however, proved faulty. Suhrawardy was
challenged by the Suez Crisis of 1956, when Israel, France, and
Britain attacked Egypt, essentially over the question of whether
the latter had the right to nationalize the Suez Canal. The reaction
in Pakistan to the invasion of a Muslim country was both
vituperative and violent. Suhrawardy rejected the demand to
support Egypt, thus increasing the fury of the street demonstrations
and further undermining his authority. Moreover, the Muslim
League’s more Islamist posturing paid off with a renewal of
popular support. Nishtar and his colleagues berated the govern-
ment and demanded Pakistan cut its Western-engineered alliances
in the Baghdad Pact and South-East Asia Treaty Organization
(SEATO). Suhrawardy was labeled a threat to the Islamic world
and a lackey of neo-imperialists. When the Jamaat-i-Islami added
its voice to the chorus of dissent, and even found common cause
with the country’s leftists and communists, Mirza sidestepped
responsibility and allowed Suhrawardy to bear the brunt of the
assault on government policy. Suhrawardy’s Awami League also
fractured over the incident and the Prime Minister’s position was
made even more tenuous. In the end, Suhrawardy’s government
was terminated and the President demonstrated how quickly he
could form still another unlikely coalition, this time between his
Republican Party and the Muslim League.

In the background of these developments Dr. Khan Sahib and
Mirza began plotting a civil coup. Talk circulated about the
formation of a “revolutionary council” that would result in the
suspension of the constitution. In 1957, on still another front,



The Military and Politics 77

provincial leaders, largely identified with the political left, formed
the National Awami Party (NAP). The NAP became the principal
rival of the Awami League in East Pakistan. Its national status,
however, also threatened the survival of the Muslim League in
West Pakistan. The NAP was an immediate and formidable
presence. Maulana Bhashani broke with the Awami League and
Suhrawardy over the Suez issue and assumed the Bengali leader-
ship of the new party. The Balochi leader A.S. Achakzai
represented the NAP in his region, Mian Iftikharuddin spoke for
the Punjab, G.M. Syed led the Sindh contingent, and Abdul
Ghaffar Khan assumed a similar role in the North West Frontier
Province. Forced by the Pakistan army to reject the radical
separatists – indeed the NAP had vowed to dissolve the One Unit
of West Pakistan and restore the original provinces – Mirza was
also ready to dismiss Suhrawardy. Ironically, Mirza’s only choice
for a new coalition partner was Abdur Rab Nishtar and his
Muslim League. In spite of all his distaste for the Islamists, Mirza
chose them for his partners in order to deny the goals of the NAP.
Political double-dealing and the curious gyrations in Pakistani
politics had reached an intolerable level. Mirza played the game as
well as anyone, but his more serious thoughts were riveted on the
necessity for a civilian-led putsch.

Mirza, however, had to contend with General Ayub Khan, who
had also displayed increasing distress over Pakistan’s sustained
instability. Ayub had become even more disillusioned with the
behavior of the country’s politicians. He was no less incensed by
Mirza’s opportunism and unabashed ambition. Whereas Mirza, to
some extent, was constrained by the political ambience, Ayub had
no difficulty in separating himself from it. As a civilian in a
constitutional system, Mirza needed to play at politics. Ayub could
avoid doing so. The two men therefore began to tread different
paths. Realizing Mirza and his immediate followers would need
the army to effect a civilian coup, Ayub pondered whether it was in
his or the army’s interest to become an instrument of personalities
they could not respect. Ayub began to think of reconstructing
Pakistan from the ground up, that is, after discarding all the
political baggage accumulated since Liaquat’s assassination.
Mirza’s selection of the Muslim Leaguer I.I. Chundrigar to be
the new Prime Minister was a case in point.



78 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Mirza could not avoid allying with the Muslim League, and
although he was able to bypass Nishtar, by selecting Chundrigar,
Ayub believed the maneuvering was counterproductive. Calm had
not been restored, popular confidence had reached its lowest level,
deeper fissures had opened between East and West Pakistan, and
now too a major controversy had erupted over the issue of
separate or joint electorates. Separate electorates stretched back
to the colonial Morley–Minto Reforms of 1909 and had become
an integral feature of Muslim League politics. Joint electorates, a
creature of the East Pakistan Awami League, which rejected the
policy of defining political affiliation along religious lines, would
include Hindus among its members. This dispute tore at the
nation’s social and political fabric, the Muslim League expressing
the concern that Pakistan’s survival was in question. Mirza saw
the affair as a tempest in a teapot, since West Pakistan was home
to so few Hindus. Moreover, elections were not a common
experience in Pakistan. The nation had yet to manage its first
national election campaign and the provincial elections were
hardly affected by the electorate issue. Nevertheless, Mirza was
forced to respond and, because proponents on each side were able
to bring their emotional supporters into the streets, he decided to
release his Muslim League partners. The Chundrigar government
was dismissed and a fellow Republican and feudal leader, Malik
Firoz Khan Noon, was called to form still another government.

Noon’s cabinet included politicians from all the significant
political parties of East and West, except Islamist organizations
like the Muslim League, Jamaat-i-Islami, and Nizam-i-Islam. Even
Dr. Khan Sahib and Suhrawardy, previously archenemies, found
common ground on which to support the new government.
Differences, however, had not diminished, and opportunism more
than accommodation was the theme of this latest scenario.
Moreover, central government activity could not obscure the
intensification of crisis politics in the two provinces. East Pakistan
was especially unstable as the principal provincial parties jockeyed
for an advantage. Unable to reconcile the politicians, particularly
those represented by Mujibur Rahman, the now established leader
of the Awami League, Mirza made Fazlul Huq the governor of the
province. Fazlul Huq acted on command in muzzling Mujib, but
he could not prevent the violence that tore up the provincial



The Military and Politics 79

legislature. Nor could Fazlul Huq prevent the mayhem from
spilling into the streets. Strikes and riots had become commonplace,
taxing police capabilities and often resulting in army intervention.
Conditions in West Pakistan were hardly better in 1958. Dr. Khan
Sahib was shot and killed by an unknown assassin, and Abdur
Rab Nishtar passed away in his sleep. Both individuals were
unique major actors on the political stage, and both were difficult
to replace. Their deaths came just as the anti-United-States
demonstrations by leftists and Islamists reached crescendo
proportions. Pakistan had joined the American cold war alliances
with SEATO in 1954 and the Central Treaty Organization
(CENTO) in 1955 and the demonstrators demanded the severance
of those pacts. In the meantime, Ghaffar Khan, the “Frontier
Gandhi,” was calling for a war (jung) against the central
government and had raised anew his earlier call to the Pashtuns
for secession and the formation of a sovereign Pashtunistan.

Firoz Khan Noon had no control over events. Nor could he
manage affairs in the parliament. Totally dependent on the
military establishment, he too yearned for an end to the political
charade. The promulgation of the constitution had done nothing
to restrain the dissidents and their followers. The country had
become unmanageable and there was no indication the rabble in
the streets would opt for laws and rules that meant nothing to
them. Moreover, there were increasing cries for rebellion and
secession in both wings of the country. All threats were registered
with General Ayub, but it was the least of the crises that moved
him to action. The Khan of Kalat, ruler of a remote and barren
region in Balochistan, declared he had taken personal control of
his ancestral lands and that he no longer respected the ties that
bound Kalat to Pakistan. Ayub, who had been patiently waiting to
take direct action against what he judged to be the anti-Pakistan
crowd, did not hesitate in sending his troops into Kalat.

On October 6, 1958 General Ayub ordered the army to seize the
Khan’s lands, depose him, and strip him of all his titles. The Khan
was subsequently arrested and thrown into a Pakistani prison. The
very next day the Pakistan army seized control of the radio and
telegraph stations in Karachi, Lahore, Peshawar, and Dacca.
Troops occupied the railway and air terminals, as well as the ports
of Karachi and Chittagong. The National Assembly and provincial



80 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

legislatures were closed and orders were given to the country’s
newspapers not to publish anything that had not been approved
by military authority. Finally, the constitution, promulgated barely
two years earlier, after so much delay and rancor, was abrogated.
All political party activity was banned. The imposition of martial
law was a reality, and given the speed with which the country was
brought under army decree, it had no doubt been planned well in
advance of the action.

The Kalat secession was merely the trip-wire, not the cause for
the military operation. When the dust settled on that first day, it
was made public that Mirza and Ayub had engineered the coup.
Mirza remained President and Ayub was named the country’s Chief
Martial Law Administrator. Dual leadership, however, was hardly
a likely prospect. Mirza now knew that Ayub had his own plan for
Pakistan’s future. Moreover, Mirza was successful at intrigue but
not given to large-scale planning. Nor did he have the support of
the army, which showed allegiance only to Ayub. Ayub Khan’s role
as Chief Martial Law Administrator was Mirza’s major obstacle
and indeed it tended to make the President redundant. Mirza
therefore lost little time in attempting to separate the army high
command from its commander-in-chief. The President told the
nation that martial law was a temporary measure. And to Ayub’s
surprise he also announced he was arranging an emergency cabinet
and had named General Ayub Prime Minister.

Ayub, however, was beyond flattery. The Prime Minister’s office,
even without the constitution, was without real power. Moreover,
the personalities that occupied the office were never secure from
the long reach of the Governor General, and now the President.
The viceregal tradition remained the central theme of Pakistani
governance. Ayub therefore refused to fall into a trap so obviously
prepared. He ordered his top commanders to meet with Mirza.
They were instructed to serve Mirza with a direct order to resign
his office and leave the country for permanent exile in Great
Britain. If he refused he would be imprisoned and tried for high
crimes. His cabal having failed, Mirza accepted the offer to leave
Pakistan and he was hurriedly escorted to a waiting aircraft.
Subsequently, General Ayub Khan declared martial law would not
be quickly lifted, nor did he have any intention of resurrecting the
abrogated constitution. The country, he said, was firmly in control



The Military and Politics 81

of the army; a new civilian government would have to wait on the
passage of events.

The Ayub Khan era

Pakistan was barely eleven years old when martial law was
clamped on the body politic. The politicians had lost the
confidence of the rank-and-file citizen, and the bureaucracy had
shown that it too was inept in mastering the political conditions.
The army’s intervention into the political realm was therefore
greeted with considerable popular approval. It had been a long and
trying decade. For most Pakistanis the belief persisted that only
the army could clean the Augean stables, or offer new directions
for their greater concerns. The abrogation of the constitution and
the stifling of the political parties received less attention than
might otherwise have been anticipated. General Ayub Khan, for a
brief moment, was the country’s knight in shining armor. Ayub
seized the moment by declaring a period of reform and national
reconstruction. He also let it be known that Pakistan was
unprepared for a full-blown experiment in parliamentary govern-
ment. Too much time had been wasted in meaningless debate, and
too many precious resources had been squandered in projects of
little national significance. Ayub declared it his intention to avoid
the pitfalls of his predecessors.

The army was organized along lines that stressed discipline and
unity and the General made it abundantly clear the country would
be organized to follow a similar path. Tribal and ethnic divisions,
vast illiteracy, and sectarian conflict militated against the
parliamentary system as well as against contemporary expressions
of democracy. Ayub was emphatic on this point. The nation was
not ready for democracy as practiced in Western Europe and
another form of democratic expression had to be found to give
voice to popular longings for self-improvement. Ayub’s answer to
the dilemma was a system of local government that he referred
to as “Basic Democracies.” Although the more sophisticated
elements of the population were quick to denounce the idea, the
General refused to be dissuaded.

Ayub introduced his Basic Democracies System on the first
anniversary of his taking power. It was a tiered arrangement. At its



82 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

lowest level were the directly elected Basic Democrats who
represented the local population. Essentially a rural system, Basic
Democracies also involved the towns and municipalities and in
large part was intended to provide the voting public with direct
connection to their representatives. Denied political party affilia-
tion, the Basic Democrats were seemingly made accountable to the
electorate, whose felt needs were to be reflected in the actions
taken by the lowest level union councils. Resources made available
to the union councils were linked with a Works Program
supported largely from funds made available from donor
countries. Basic Democracies in Ayub’s judgment was a method
of learning the ways of self-government; it also sought to expand
developmental operations at the grassroot level.

Guiding the Basic Democrats was a second tier composed of
elected chairmen of the union councils and members of the civil
bureaucracy. Expertise in managing projects was supposedly
available at this level and it was soon clear that the professional
administrators had been made responsible for the success or
failure of local ventures. The third tier corresponded with district
administration, with the deputy commissioner established as
the chairman of a body that represented more sophisticated law
and order issues as well as developmental matters. The fourth tier
represented the traditional administrative divisions; this tier was
clearly dominated by senior members of the civil service. The
immediate criticism leveled against Basic Democracies was that
the system did little to free the citizen from the control of the
bureaucracy. Ayub deflected such attacks by emphasizing the need
to tutor the population in political responsibility while also
recruiting the masses for their own self-improvement.

Still another criticism surfaced shortly after the creation of the
Basic Democracies when Ayub called for a vote of confidence in
his administration and asked the Basic Democrats to cast the
required votes. No one expected the Basic Democrats, all
beholden to Ayub, to vote against him and thereby nullify their
newly acquired influence. Despite the criticism, therefore, Ayub
was overwhelmingly given his vote of confidence and Basic
Democracies became a centerpiece of his administration. Ayub,
however, moved on a number of fronts soon after assuming the
presidency. Martial law was sustained indefinitely. Ayub promoted



The Military and Politics 83

himself to the rank of Field Marshal and retained effective but not
direct control of the Pakistan army and armed forces.

Armed with dictatorial powers, Ayub’s rule was more benign
than oppressive. Politicians were isolated and often imprisoned,
but Ayub’s purpose was to embarrass, humiliate, and neutralize,
not physically punish, let alone order the execution of those
deemed guilty of illicit and often criminal behavior. Ayub was not
mean spirited, nor did he harbor a vengeful attitude. National
solidarity was his objective, and he sought the cooperation of
those whom he believed had the country’s preservation as their
primary interest. A student of Aligarh, Ayub imbibed much of
Jinnah’s teaching and although a staunch Muslim he too believed
the country was better off when freed from the machinations of
those in the religious community who stressed a theological
definition of the state. Ayub assumed a secular stance in his
contest with the Islamists and for him the country was too divided
along ethnic, religious, and geographic lines to adopt an
absolutist interpretation of Islam. Muslim interests had to be
served because the state was formed to provide Muslims with a
freedom they did not expect to enjoy in a country dominated by
Hindus. But this did not mean Muslims could ignore the views of
non-Muslims, nor did it mean one version of Islamic practice
prevailed over others. Ayub therefore opposed sectarian expres-
sion in all its forms and displayed little patience with those
measuring loyalty in the context of narrowly defined religious
beliefs.

Ayub inherited a refugee problem of immense proportions. Little
if anything had been done to alleviate the plight of those that had
come to Pakistan from India after partition. He ordered one of his
premier generals to bulldoze the slum dwellings around Karachi
and Dacca and erect permanent housing for the otherwise most
neglected segments of the population. Previous governments also
had done nothing to reduce the corruption in the distribution of
evacuee property. Venal behavior had become the pattern in the
issuing of licenses, the setting of standards, and the determination
of ownership of property. Ayub’s administration sought to put an
end to these practices and to assure the distribution of holdings
would be proper and fair. Rapid industrialization, however,
complicated the task of those responsible for the equitable



84 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

distribution of resources. By the same token, prices for essential
commodities were arbitrarily inflated and the collection of taxes
from the wealthy was a virtual impossibility. The few therefore
had grown rich at the expense of the many and the general public
was made to suffer high prices and massive unemployment. Black
markets flourished in these conditions. Food and medicine were
adulterated and standards were hard to implement. Smuggling
was rampant and too many government officials were found
engaged in the selling of permits for imported goods.

The martial law government was called to address all these
problems. It restricted the import of foreign-made products, it
lowered prices on staple and essential items, and it was forceful in
arresting those found exploiting the public. Public corporations
were established in vital sectors of the economy, and army officers,
both serving and retired, were placed in charge of their operations.
The government also tried an export bonus scheme in an effort to
stimulate economic growth, and those businesses involved in
questionable practices were sealed or seized so that their account
books could be audited for fraud and other misdemeanors. The
business community decried these actions and a number of
business leaders fled the country, taking their wealth with them.
Nevertheless, the government uncovered hidden caches in a
number of high-profile cases and the general public truly believed
the Ayub government would bring an end to the huge concentration
of wealth in a few hands.

Ayub also introduced land reforms and a Land Reform
Commission was established with orders to break up the feudal
estates in West Pakistan, especially in the Punjab. Individual
holdings of five hundred acres of irrigated land, one thousand of
non-irrigated land, and 150 acres of orchard land were
sanctioned, and the opportunity was provided to transfer excess
land to other family members. What were deemed to be surplus
holdings were to be transferred to government control for
distribution to the landless cultivators. Lands identified with
pious endowments, however, were not included. AWest Pakistan
Land Commission was created to implement the reforms and in
time it came to control more than two and a half million acres of
farmland. The Commission paid substantial sums in compensation
for the seizure of lands from about nine hundred large landlords,



The Military and Politics 85

but the landed elite remained intact and very few peasant-
cultivators experienced a change in their living standard.

Good intentions were never enough in the implementation
phase. In spite of the serious effort to serve the mass public by
targeting those aggrandizing themselves, Ayub’s reforms fell short
of their mark. In the agricultural sector, little was really done to
reduce the power and influence of the country’s landlords. The
martial law authority was dependent on the landlords for the
maintenance of law and order in their respective regions and the
regime could not avoid complicity with the major feudal chieftains.
Moreover, the land had been abused and misused since colonial
times when barrage systems were developed to enhance the
productivity of the soil. It was no coincidence that the largest and
most powerful landlords were located in Punjab and Sindh
provinces, the location of the most extensive barrage and
irrigation systems. But the inability to properly use large quantities
of water had produced a nightmare of waterlogging and salinity
by the time Pakistan achieved independence. More land was
removed from cultivation each year than could be replaced by
improved practices. Ayub therefore leaned on both the landlords
and foreign donors, notably the United States, to address the
dilemma. A vast and costly project was launched to reverse the
loss of land and to reclaim lands already affected, but this could
not be done without the support of the feudal leaders. Ayub
launched a “Green Revolution” aimed at improving agricultural
yields, but the role of the large landlord class was central to its
success. In the end, little was done to correct the politics of land-
holding and the influence of the landed class remained virtually
unchecked.

One of the first martial law regulations was aimed at identifying
and eliminating corrupt civil servants. Taking bribes and other
abuses of power were commonplace and tribunals were estab-
lished to ferret out the worst miscreants. Numerous civilian
committees were organized and provided quasi-judicial powers to
try bureaucrats who had violated the public trust. By the end of
June 1959, 1662 central government officials and more than four
thousand provincial officers were found guilty of a variety of
offenses and removed from the service. Although many dishonest
officials escaped scrutiny, there was no ignoring the positive effect



86 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

of the program. To assure a higher ethical standard, Ayub
promoted the establishment of a number of training institutions
for civil servants. The Pakistan Administrative Staff College was
organized to provide in-service training for senior officials, while
the National Institutes of Public Administration offered educa-
tional experience to middle managers. Rural Development
Academies were also created to center administrative expertise
in strictly agrarian circumstances. Ayub presided over the Bureau
of National Reconstruction with its emphasis on attitudinal
change and ethical behavior. Ayub called on the country’s leaders
to posture themselves as role models and practice probity and a
genuine sense of national responsibility. Concerned with the need
to transcend sectarianism, provincialism, tribalism, and rival clan
behavior, the martial law government spoke of the need for socio-
psychological engineering, but programs to implement such
activity were as limited as the people who might be called upon
to lead them.

Responsibility for all sorts of reform rested on indigenous
personnel. A Woman’s Voluntary Group, led by the President’s
wife, was formed in 1959 to encourage the development of cottage
industries, but the program failed to enlist the services of the upper
classes, who insisted on maintaining their peculiar lifestyles. The
more affluent members of society preferred imported goods to the
poorer-quality local manufactures; their buying habits stunted
the growth of domestic industries. Moreover, the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting had been given overall charge of
such programs and failure was often attributed to false and
misleading propaganda. Similar efforts were made to improve
working conditions and especially manager–labor relations. Strikes
and protest marches, so common before the martial law period,
were banned. The Ayub government pressured property owners to
elevate pay scales as well as to make the workplace a safer
environment. An Industrial Disputes Ordinance was put into force
to improve communications between labor and management, and
an Industrial Court was created to mediate contentious disputes.
Although lacking in achievements, Ayub’s administration had
raised the profile of the working class and contributed to higher
worker productivity. For the first time, labor abuses, particularly
among the very poor and illiterate, were given consideration.



The Military and Politics 87

The Ayub government formed numerous commissions to
investigate the legal, educational, and medical systems, as well
as the role of the press. A Law Commission examined the work of
the courts and recommended the establishment of Family Courts
to focus attention on marriage and divorce as well as the care of
children. Citing high population increases, Ayub plunged into the
family planning issue, ordering the expansion of clinics concerned
with the distribution of birth control information and devices.
Addressing a subject that his critics argued preached a form of
blasphemy, Ayub tried to comfort his compatriots, saying he had
no intention of attacking Islamic teaching; that his sole concern
was unlimited population growth and the threat it posed to the
country’s attempt to lift itself from poverty. Resistance to family
planning, however, was well organized and passionate. Under
pressure, Ayub pressed for acceptance of the Muslim Family Laws
Ordinance that required the registration of marriages and divorce.
Again insisting the Family Laws in no way contradicted the
Qur’an, he said the purpose of the laws was to preserve the family
by protecting the weaker female partner from an abusive husband.
Although the Family Laws Ordinance was largely in tune with the
more sophisticated section of the population, the overwhelming
majority was constrained by more traditional practices. The laws
impacted on Sunni Muslims differently from Shia Muslims, and
religious divines combined forces with the Islamists to impede
their implementation. Ayub’s creation of a Central Institute of
Islamic Research was an attempt to bypass the ulema’s legal
commentaries and to provide more modern explanations of
Islamic tradition. Acknowledged scholars of Islam were made
directors of the Institute in an effort to elevate its prestige, but the
intensification of the assault on the family planning program made
even these individuals targets of a mounting anti-Ayub opposition.

Ayub had taken a page from the book of Mustafa Kemal
Ataturk, the army leader who had played the pivotal role in the
creation of the modern Republic of Turkey. Ataturk had
emphasized the need to establish Turkey as a secular state and
had introduced wide-ranging reforms that successfully separated
the country from its immediate past. Ayub sought to imitate
Ataturk, but conditions in Pakistan were not the same. Turkey had
been salvaged from the remnants of the Ottoman Empire;



88 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Pakistan was a consequence of a colonial dispensation that had
little relevance to the contemporary nation-state. Turkey emerged
as a sovereign and independent nation-state in wartime circum-
stances that assured instant national identity. Pakistan arrived on
the world stage as a truncated structure, housing a diverse,
disparate, and divided people. Furthermore, the British Raj
officiated at a transfer of power to a political movement that
had not yet established itself as a formal political party. Ayub
therefore inherited the legacy of a failed political experience that
was long on rhetoric and sentiment but short on the pragmatic
methods of self-government.

The Muslim League bore closer resemblance to the Moghuls
than to a modern political organization. Hence the League chose
ruling over shared governance and failed to lay the foundation for
a competitive political environment. Seeking a monopoly of power,
in a few short years the League had become an anachronism,
something that could be ignored, and in a short time discarded. By
its own actions, the Muslim League also became the catalyst for
the formation of numerous organizations, none of which truly gave
the interests of the whole nation high priority. In spite of the
obvious need for guidance and effective public policy, successive
Pakistan governments abdicated their responsibilities and plunged
the nation into deeper problems. It was these circumstances that
challenged General Ayub. Given his apolitical background, it is
remarkable how well he grasped the essentials of his new calling.
Ataturk’s experience may well have nurtured his psyche, but Ayub
alone made the decision to reconstruct Pakistan.

No one, save Ayub, had given serious consideration to the kind
of nation Pakistan might become. The Government of India Act,
1935 and the India Independence Act, 1947 framed the form of
government that Pakistan would inherit from its former colonial
rulers. No effort had been made to determine whether the political
design suggested by those imperial actions was suited to Pakistan’s
circumstances. It was only with Ayub’s seizure of power and the
neutralizing of the forces that had played with Pakistan’s destiny
that a determined effort was made toward national reconstruction.
Ayub spoke about the “genius” of the Pakistani nation and for
doing so he was heavily criticized as furthering his personal
interests. In fact, however, he was the first of Pakistan’s leaders



The Military and Politics 89

after Jinnah to demonstrate a vision for a country still in the
process of becoming. Ayub’s opponents, who derived from many
circles, accused him of duplicity and self-serving behavior, of
reaching for absolute power and personal glory, but these
opponents never offered an alternative plan for the new nation.
Ayub’s role as Pakistan’s principal architect derived more from the
forces arrayed against him than from his own person. Nevertheless,
Ayub was, by every estimate of leadership, forward looking and
dedicated to steering a course that the nation could follow long
after him.

It was Ayub Khan who called for the building of a new capital
on the Potwar Plateau, outside of Rawalpindi. Arguing that
Karachi could not remain the seat of government, Ayub cited the
commercial significance of the port, as well as its vast international
air terminus. Business and government required separation and
ample room for expansion. Moreover, the Pakistan government
required far more space than was conveniently available in
Karachi. From such initial thinking came the decision to construct
a new city in the Pakistani hinterland. Ayub spoke of his dream for
a new capital at a governors’ conference in June 1959. He
described the site of the federal capital as bridging Punjab and the
North West Frontier Province. He also mentioned the need for
what he called a “second” or “administrative capital” in Dacca,
East Pakistan. Though he was sensitive to the concerns of the
Bengalis for parity, Ayub’s gesture was not well received by the
Bengalis and from the outset they were among the most vocal
opponents of the scheme. What Ayub believed to be the extension
of a helping hand was translated into a “second best” notion that
did more to stir the passions than temper them. Nevertheless,
ground was broken for the building of Islamabad in the early
1960s, and the second-capital project followed shortly afterwards.
Critics continued to complain about the audacity of the
administration and that the projects would bankrupt the nation
and pit one region of the country against the others. Mindful of
this opposition, Ayub nevertheless gave the order to commence
operations, and construction on both “capitals” proceeded with
due speed. The shift of federal offices from Karachi to Islamabad
was slated for 1964, with the embassies beginning their move the
following year.



90 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

In his many reforms Ayub anticipated the eventual heightening
of a revitalized Pakistani identity and the bridging of the divide
separating East and West Pakistan. Expectations, however, are
easily dashed and so it was with Ayub Khan. For all his references
to democratic enrichment, Ayub was a dictator and behaved like
one, especially in the eyes of his detractors. Martial law remained
in place for almost four years. The Ayub administration had
sufficient time to cause distress in numerous places and among
many different would-be representatives of the Pakistani nation.
Ayub had argued forcefully against the reinstatement of political
parties, believing they did more to diminish growth than enhance
it. Controversy, Ayub believed, was acceptable so long as the result
was positive and in the best interests of the country. Controversy,
however, that deepened hostilities, exploited divisions, and
ignored institutional compromise served no meaningful purpose
and was best avoided. Pakistani society was far too subjected to
ambitious leaders and their inherently violent followers to benefit
from the free play of organized politics. People, he believed,
needed time to develop the characteristics of citizenship and
responsibility. Leaders needed to understand the significance of
accountability. Education and hands-on experience in the funda-
mentals of self-government, as in the Basic Democracies, might
have reduced politics to the lowest common denominator, but
without that exposure it was doubtful the people of Pakistan could
accommodate twentieth-century experience.

Ayub was dedicated to the restructuring of Pakistan. He
envisaged a new constitutional order that was more suited to
the genius of the nation, and he organized a Constitution
Commission to take on that task. It was Ayub’s objective to bury
the past and at the same time to erect an edifice that reflected the
nature and purpose of the country. Referred to by a distant
admirer as a Solon or “Law Giver,” Ayub was not yet ready to
retreat from the political scene, nor was he one to yield to his
opposition without a struggle. Much had been done during the
period of martial law, but the real test of the Ayub era would be
seen in the period that lay ahead.



The Military and Politics 91

Bibliography
Ahmed, Mohammad, My Chief, Lahore: Longman, Green, 1960.
Ali, Tariq, Pakistan: Military Rule or People’s Power?, London: Jonathan

Cape, 1970.
Ashford, Douglas E., National Development and Local Reform: Political

Participation in Morocco, Tunisia and Pakistan, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1967.

Choudhury, G.W., Democracy in Pakistan, Vancouver: University of
British Columbia, 1963.

Feldman, Herbert, Revolution in Pakistan: A Study of the Martial Law
Administration, London: Oxford University Press, 1967.

Gardezi, Hassan and Rashid, Jamil, Pakistan: The Roots of Dictatorship,
London: Zed Press, 1983.

Jennings, Sir Ivor, Constitutional Problems in Pakistan, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1957.

Kennedy, Charles H., Bureaucracy in Pakistan, Karachi: Oxford
University Press, 1987.

Khan, Mohammad Ayub, Friends Not Masters: A Political Autobiography,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967.

Mahmood, Afzal, Law and Principles of Local Government in Pakistan:
Basic Democracies, Lahore: All Pakistan Legal Decisions, 1964.

McDonough, Sheila, “Pakistan,” in Islam in Politics: A Muslim World
Symposium, reprinted from The Muslim World, Hartford: Hartford
Seminary Foundation, 1966.

Minattur, Joseph,Martial Law in India, Pakistan and Ceylon, The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1962.

Rizvi, Hasan-Askari, The Military and Politics in Pakistan, Lahore:
Progressive Publishers, 1974.

Rizvi, Hasan-Askari, The Military and Politics in Pakistan, 1947–86,
Lahore: Progressive Publishers, 1986.

Saeed, S. A., President without Precedent: A Brilliant Account of Ayub
and His Regime, Lahore: Lahore Book Depot, 1960.

Smith, Wilfred Cantwell, Islam in Modern History, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1957.

Zahur-ud-Din, Mian,West Pakistan Family Courts Act, Lahore: Mansoor
Book House, 1965.

Zakaria, Nasim, Parliamentary Government in Pakistan, Lahore: New
Publishers, 1958.

Ziring, Lawrence, The Ayub Khan Era: Politics in Pakistan, 1958–1969,
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1971.



4
YEARS OF WAR: THE TURNING POINT

There is never a definitive answer to the question of whether
individuals or events are more important in the making of history.
One thing is certain, however: people and events are bundled
together in a nexus that makes people either the master of events
or their victims. Mohammad Ayub Khan, Field Marshal and
President of Pakistan, set himself the task of salvaging what he
could from Jinnah’s creation. As a junior officer in the British
Indian army, Ayub would have been content to serve his time in
the service of the monarchy, but events decreed otherwise. Once
the Pakistan Movement assumed real purpose and pointed in the
direction of a Muslim-dominant state in the subcontinent, there
was no question about Ayub’s choice or his decision. As a Pashtun
from the Rawalpindi region, there was no alternative to joining
Pakistan and the Pakistan army. Events were in the saddle and
Ayub rode them in the direction they were headed. A Sandhurst
graduate and the scion of a family with an army heritage, Ayub
was seasoned as an officer in World War II. Opting for Pakistan,
he subsequently was named to the Services Selection Board by
Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan and was a ranking officer in the
Punjab Boundary Force when the province was divided between
India and Pakistan. Nothing in those very early days hinted that
Ayub Khan in a few short years would become the central actor in
the Pakistan story. Events were in the saddle and in the tumultuous

92



Years of War 93

years leading up to and following partition, one could only follow
what destiny had determined.

Ayub was not the most senior general in the chain of command
when he was selected to become the first indigenous commander
of the Pakistan army. Ayub replaced Sir Douglas Gracey after
serving a tour as General Officer Commanding in East Bengal.
Ayub’s selection to head the Pakistan army was a consequence of
two recommendations, one by Defense Secretary Iskandar Mirza
and the other by Begum Liaquat Ali Khan, the Prime Minister’s
wife. Ayub’s appointment did not sit well with some of the higher
serving officers and a plot was soon launched to oust him, to take
control of the army, and to dismantle the government – the
“Rawalpindi Conspiracy.” Ayub was alerted to an intended coup
led by General Akbar Khan, and without hesitation he ordered the
arrest and trial of the General and his conspirators. It was a
formative moment in the professional life of Mohammad Ayub
Khan and his actions demonstrated that he, not events, was in
control. The experience hardened the resolve of the army
commander and for the first time caused him to contemplate his
new role and how it intertwined with Pakistan’s future. Once in
the saddle, Ayub became a maker of events and he no longer
doubted that his destiny and the country’s destiny were one and
the same.

Ayub’s appointment as commander of the Pakistan army became
official in January 1951. Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan revealed
the “Rawalpindi Conspiracy” to the Pakistani public in March.
Liaquat’s assassination occurred in October of that same year.
These events placed Ayub in the forefront of Pakistani political life
and shaped his future. While primarily concerned with the
modernization of the army, he had become too involved in the
political process to assume a neutral role, especially following
the emasculation of the Muslim League and its displacement by
members of the higher bureaucracy. Ayub was a close observer of
the events that brought Ghulam Mohammad and Iskandar Mirza
into the chief executive’s office. He served both men loyally and
faithfully but also noted their failings, and pondered the long-term
effect of their administrations on the nation. Ayub had rejected
Ghulam Mohammad’s order to declare martial law in 1954, and
he patiently gave the politicians as much time as the country could



94 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

tolerate in the hope that differences could be resolved and the
nation’s business addressed. Only when all other remedies had
been exhausted did he agree to follow Mirza’s lead in dissolving
the civilian government of Malik Firoz Khan Noon. Martial law
was imposed on the nation reluctantly but firmly. Ayub and Mirza,
however, were very different personalities, and from the outset it
was obvious they could not both rule Pakistan. Confronted by still
another conspiracy, and realizing Pakistan needed a new beginning,
Ayub no longer waited on events. His actions in removing Mirza
were swift and defining. On September 27, 1958, with Mirza on a
plane bound for England, Mohammad Ayub Khan became
President of Pakistan.

Once having consolidated his power, Ayub turned immediately
to the work of reconstituting the political system, albeit under the
limitations of martial law. Described as a dictator, the General,
now a self-made Field Marshal, emphasized the need for national
renewal in a country divided against itself as well as threatened
by its larger neighbor. Ayub’s effort to reduce tensions between
India and Pakistan had been thwarted by Indian Prime Minister
Jawaharlal Nehru. Nehru rejected Ayub’s offer of joint defense.
He also refused to entertain a negotiated settlement of their
Kashmir dispute. Diplomacy was neglected in favor of increased
military posturing, and the conditions that strained their
relationship went unattended. Had Nehru not been in the
twilight of his life perhaps he would have recognized that the
man in uniform was his best opportunity for a substantive and
permanent agreement. Subsequent events would reveal how
tragic was the loss of that moment in 1959 when Ayub reached
for the hand of his adversary, only to realize there was nothing to
grasp.

Unable to move on the international front, Ayub devoted much
of his energy to domestic affairs. National unity shared highest
priority alongside national security. Ayub bypassed the politicians
and enlisted the services of some of the brightest of Pakistan’s
military and civil officers, in addition to intellectuals and career
specialists. Notable among his choices was a Lahore barrister, the
sophisticated and well-educated Manzur Qadir. Like Ayub and his
army colleagues, Manzur Qadir saw the need for a system of
political order that weighed heavily in favor of the executive



Years of War 95

branch. Ayub also drafted a number of high-ranking generals to
serve as ministers and ambassadors and to assume other high
profile roles in the central and provincial governments. Ayub chose
his confidants with care and with concern for the needs of his
administration. The generals surrounding him were selected for
their loyalty and discipline as well as their ability to lead. The
civilians were chosen for their intelligence and sophistication and
in the belief that their services to the nation would be marked and
enduring. One appointment, however, proved critical. Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto, the son of a pre-independence politician and one of Sindh
province’s most prominent landlords, had graduated from the
University of California, Berkeley, and had passed the bar at
Britain’s Lincoln’s Inn. He was brought to Ayub’s attention after a
brief stint as a teacher and publicist of international law. Ayub was
impressed with Bhutto’s credentials and youthful potential, and at
the age of 29 Bhutto was admitted to the federal cabinet. It was
not long before Bhutto entered Ayub’s inner circle.

Bhutto’s intimacy with Ayub and his special interest in
international affairs drew him into army circles, where he
cultivated ranking officers and appeared to share their views and
concerns. He also revealed significant interest in the Kashmir
dilemma and was drawn to those officers with an abiding
determination to gain control over the disputed territory. Bhutto
even made associations with the accused in the “Rawalpindi
Conspiracy,” notably its leader Akbar Khan, who in 1955 had
been set free on orders of Ghulam Mohammad. Akbar Khan had
joined the Awami League of H.S. Suhrawardy upon his release,
but after the banning of the parties following the imposition of
martial law he decided to attend law school. Akbar Khan
remained a determined foe of Ayub Khan and he often stood
out among those denouncing the Field Marshal as a dictator and
tyrant. Ayub saw nothing wrong in Bhutto’s activities, and indeed
believed his ability to relate to different sectors of public opinion
was an asset not a problem for his administration. By the same
token, Bhutto saw no reason to alter his behavior, especially
because with every new connection he expanded his personal
horizon. Although the Ayub regime in time would lose virtually all
its popularity, Bhutto’s stock in the political process continued to
grow. The young man seemed unable to do anything wrong and



96 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

his political destiny could only be enhanced by Ayub’s negative
ratings.

Despite Bhutto’s behind-the-scenes maneuvers, Ayub continued
to nurture the young man. Ayub’s decision to lift martial law in
1962 and to restore the political process met with Bhutto’s
approval, although it was obvious he disagreed with the counsel
provided to Ayub by Manzur Qadir. Compared with the middle-
aged Qadir, Bhutto was young, flamboyant, and dynamic, and
enjoyed interacting with the public. Qadir had no interest in
politics or personal power and served the President only with the
thought that his services helped shape a more integrated and
forward-looking nation. Qadir was the proverbial scholar, a man
of grace and even temperament. Bhutto, by contrast, was
passionate and mercurial and had developed a burning ambition
to rule Pakistan. Qadir and Bhutto had studied abroad, each was a
lawyer, but Qadir possessed none of the aristocratic airs of Bhutto.
Manzur Qadir sought no personal rewards or honors. Bhutto, on
the other hand, joined Ayub because the Field Marshal con-
tributed to the realization of his aspirations. Each man became an
intimate of Ayub, but each played a different role in his
administration: one was a private confidant of the President, the
other a public personality with a gift of oratory that was especially
important with the younger generation.

The presidential constitution that Ayub promulgated in 1962
was the acknowledged work of Manzur Qadir. The decision to
disallow party politics also revealed Qadir’s influence. So too did
the intention to emphasize Pakistan as a secular state. Moreover,
the belief persisted that the politicians needed mentoring in the
ways of democratic behavior, and that their party affiliations were
more a formula for political instability than a representation of
competitive politics. National unity was the fundamental goal of
the Ayub administration and Ayub reopened the political process
with what he hoped would be a system without parties. It was not
long, however, before Ayub was forced to admit that the
reinstatement of conventional political activity was necessary.
Nor could Ayub avoid the clamor that Pakistan be identified with
its Muslim yearnings. Under pressure to officially declare Pakistan
an Islamic Republic, Ayub cast aside his original plan and all
reference to secularism was muted.



Years of War 97

The gathering storm

Once Ayub decided to permit parties to function again, as a sitting
President he was forced to either join or form his own political
organization. The result was the creation of the Conventionist
Muslim League, which drew its support from those prepared to
acknowledge their dependence on the Ayub mantra. It was at this
juncture that Manzur Qadir decided to return to private life.
Qadir’s departure opened up still other opportunities for the
ambitious Mr. Bhutto. With Manzur Qadir out of the picture,
Bhutto gained prominence as Ayub’s principal cabinet adviser.
Bhutto’s influence with the administration was significant, so too
was his appeal to the youthful public. Ayub’s unpopularity not
only did not rub off on Bhutto, but also gave Bhutto’s persona
greater stature. Moreover, with the lifting of martial law and the
promulgation of the new constitution, the political opposition
became more vocal and they did not refrain from heaping abuse
on the President and his administration. Ayub had insisted on and
had promulgated a presidential constitution. The politicians could
not be reconciled to the change, especially because it institution-
alized and gave new meaning to the viceregal tradition. The
politicians read in these developments a dictatorial regime that all
but eliminated their role in the political process. Judged as yet
another aspect of Ayub’s “Basic Democracies,” it reminded the
dissenters of Mirza’s and Dr. Khan Sahib’s ruminations about
“guided democracy.” Concluding the system was stacked against
them, the politicians resolved to sustain a campaign to have the
constitution abrogated, not amended.

The constitution retained an indirect from of election for the
office of President, and in 1964 Ayub announced the holding of
presidential elections. The Basic Democrats were to be the only
voters, however, and the presidential candidates would have to
seek their votes. The opposition immediately cried foul and saw
the election as a hypocritical act, tilted totally in favor of the
President. Ayub’s detractors vehemently protested this manner of
election, but finally agreed to participate. Citing Ayub’s strength
and their weakness, the politicians formed a united front, soon
identified as the Combined Opposition Party (COP). Also
acknowledging that none in their ranks had national appeal, the



98 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

leaders of the COP called upon Ms. Fatima Jinnah, the sister of the
Quaid-i-Azam, to challenge Ayub. Fatima had chosen a reclusive
life following the death of her brother, but publicly expressed her
pleasure in 1958 when Ayub Khan forced Iskandar Mirza into
exile. Now, however, after forty-four months of martial law, after
the promulgation of still another constitution, and with Ayub
appearing to want a lifetime presidency, she agreed to become the
COP standard bearer.

The opposition also registered dissatisfaction with the President’s
foreign policy. Ayub had drawn ever closer to the United States.
His goal remained the transformation of Pakistan and the building
of a modern South Asian state. The United States relationship was
seen as the key unlocking the door to medieval thinking that
denied Pakistanis a view of the contemporary world. Ayub
welcomed American government ideas and support as well as
private investment, and Americans and American-sponsored
programs were established in virtually every sector of Pakistani
society. Rural development and land reclamation were given
special consideration, but ample attention was given to health,
education, social welfare, and good governance. The United States
also made Pakistan a major recipient of military aid and Pakistan’s
alliances with the United States played a significant role in cold
war strategy.

In 1961, Ayub was invited by President John F. Kennedy to
make a state visit to the United States, where the Field Marshal
delivered a major address to a joint sitting of the U.S. Congress.
President Kennedy also entertained Ayub in a fashion befitting
royalty. But while Ayub cut an impressive figure in Washington, it
did little to elevate his popularity in Pakistan. At home, Ayub was
seen as engaged in personal aggrandizement, and all his construc-
tive works, including the building of Islamabad, were judged to be
so much personal vanity. The presidential election campaign there-
fore centered more on what were considered the negative aspects
of the Ayub administration than on any of its positive works. Ayub
was reminded that he was a dictator propped up by the Americans
as well as the country’s civil–military bureaucracy and landlord
class. Leftists and Islamists merged their political roles in an effort
to convince the public that too much foreign influence combined
with feudal dominance denied the people a proper role in shaping



Years of War 99

the country’s future. Moreover, the country was more concerned
about its larger and bellicose neighbor, and particularly India’s
refusal to allow the Kashmiri people to determine their own
future. Ayub’s failure to take advantage of Indian weakness during
its conflict with China in 1962 also did not sit well with a solid
portion of the Pakistani nation. American military assistance to
New Delhi, following the Chinese incursion, weakened Ayub’s
grip on his own army, which saw the American aid program as a
betrayal of alliance commitments. Furthermore, Ayub’s constraint
during the India–China border war, his reluctance to take
advantage of Indian weakness in Kashmir, was attributed to his
United States connection. Thus, the COP ignored the accomplish-
ments of the administration, condemned it for its intimacy with
Washington, and made the freeing of Kashmir a central issue in
their campaign.

The rising passions in West Pakistan, notably in the Punjab and
North West Frontier Province over the unresolved Kashmir
dispute, could not be ignored. Nor was Ayub in a good position
to address the issue. As a consequence, this task was left to
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who had been elevated to Foreign Minister.
Ayub had come to regard Bhutto as a vital element in the success
of his reform program, and he unleashed the minister to address
the Kashmir issue as he saw fit. That proved to be a major mistake.
Unlike Ayub, Bhutto wanted distance from the United States and
was determined to emphasize Pakistan’s independent foreign
policy. He was less interested in Ayub’s nation-building program,
and the Field Marshal’s dependence on the United States was most
discomforting. Bhutto had developed a strong antipathy toward
the United States. His work among Pakistani youth had more than
convinced him that the association with America had serious
drawbacks. Pakistani young people were largely dissatisfied with
their lot and heavily influenced by leftist ideas on the one side and
Islamist callings on the other. Military alliances were no assurance
of satisfaction on an emotional plane, nor did they serve Pakistan’s
material interest. While the rich acquired still greater wealth,
poverty and illiteracy weighed heavy on the masses and, despite
Ayub’s record of improving the national infrastructure, little had
been done to relieve their plight. The politicians therefore posed as
the representatives of the misbegotten and were eager to challenge



100 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

the entire range of Ayub’s policies. A politician in the making,
Bhutto shared the sentiments of the opposition, and, like them, he
was convinced that America’s support for the Ayub regime and
other anti-Communist governments around the world knowingly
reinforced dictatorship and seldom encouraged democratic devel-
opment.

Aside from the United States, India was the bête noire in the
minds of young Pakistanis. Hindu intransigence was equated with
anti-Muslim sentiments, and New Delhi’s reluctance to yield
Muslim-dominant Kashmir, to allow it self-determination or union
with Pakistan, was judged a blow against Islam itself. Islamist
elements in Pakistan drew strength from the struggle over Kashmir
and no administration, no matter how secular its performance
could ignore the popular appeal, or the Islamic character of the
Kashmir issue. Moreover, from the beginning the Kashmir dispute
had defined the relationship between Pakistan and India, and
India’s rejection of U.N. resolutions, as well as international
diplomatic efforts, hinted at an intractable problem that would be
resolved only in a show of arms. Moreover, neither country had
won its independence through armed struggle, and the Kashmir
conflict offered each a chance to define its central ethos in the
context of blood sacrifice. India’s national identity as a secular, not
a religious, state was central to the thinking of those responsible
for the governance of India. In turn, the justification for Pakistan’s
existence as an Islamic republic was made to hinge on the
liberation of India’s only Muslim-dominant state. The perpetuation
of the Kashmir dispute therefore meant the indefinite extension of
the struggle for independence. The British had long packed their
bags and returned to the mother country, but the insoluble conflict
over Kashmir indicated there could be no peace for the
subcontinent.

India and Pakistan squandered much of their potential by their
failure to resolve the Kashmir problem. But for Pakistan this meant
the obscuring of nation-building tasks. The armed forces consumed
an extremely high percentage of the country’s resources, but even
the military could not limit the raucous activity of the narrowly
defined Islamist orders, or temper the sustained regional and
sectarian violence. The sustained unrest in the country prevented
the construction of a viable, legitimate, and sophisticated political



Years of War 101

system. Political coherence was totally neglected. Political debate
led nowhere and the politics of negativism gained supremacy.
Street demonstrations, not parliamentary debate, dominated the
political scene and the strenuous use of police powers did nothing
for the maturation of democratic practices. Moreover, the never to
be resolved Kashmir dispute sustained the role of the demagogues
– and no one fitted that role better than Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.

Bhutto let it be known that without Kashmir, Pakistan would
lack “full meaning.” This was the message he brought to the
election campaign of 1964. Bhutto exploited popular feeling
aroused during the previous year when it was alleged that a hair
from the beard of the Prophet had been stolen from the Hazratbal
Shrine in Srinigar. The incident had precipitated widespread riots
in both Pakistan and India. Tensions between the two countries
also intensified, causing the United Nations Security Council to
intervene in the hope of bringing a measure of calm. Bhutto had
gone to New York City to present his country’s case to the U.N.,
but, always the gifted showman, he used the opportunity to
excoriate the Security Council’s do-nothing posture, and then
dramatically abandoned the proceedings and returned home.
Arriving back in Pakistan, he met with Zhou Enlai, who was on an
official visit to the country. The moment gave Bhutto still another
opportunity to demonstrate to his emotional public that he was a
different kind of leader. Thus when India’s Prime Minister
suddenly indicated an interest in discussing the Kashmir problem
and ordered the release from custody of the Kashmiri leader
Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah, instead of accepting the Indian
offer, Bhutto took the dramatic step of inviting Abdullah to visit
Pakistan. Caught off-guard, the Indian government agreed to
sanction Abdullah’s visit to Pakistan.

In May 1964 Abdullah arrived in Pakistan to counsel peace and
called for a meeting between Ayub and Nehru. For a brief period it
appeared that serious efforts would be given to breaking the
impasse on the Kashmir issue. Events, however, are never
predictable. In office some seventeen years, Nehru had aged and
become ill. Having previously suffered a stroke, he suddenly
succumbed to his illness and passed away. For Ayub, Nehru’s
death could not have been more consequential. No one among
Nehru’s successors had the status to pick up the fallen leader’s



102 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

mantle. No other Indian leader was in a position to compromise
on the Kashmir dispute. Ayub was reminded of his entreaty to
Nehru in 1959, when he had offered the Indian leader joint
defense of the subcontinent and was rebuffed. Events again had
conspired against the parties, leaving the demagogues to have their
way. The opportunity afforded Bhutto therefore was enormous.
Already the most popular political personality in Pakistan, Bhutto
was able to cement his personal following. No discussions were
pressed between Ayub and Nehru’s successor, Lal Bahadur Shastri.
Ayub entered the election campaign without the capacity to touch
the masses, and his only satisfaction was the indirect nature of the
election which allowed him to direct his message to a relatively
small class of electors.

Bhutto used the platform provided by the presidential election,
not so much to sing the praises of President Ayub Khan, but to
excoriate the Americans, even to the extent of accusing the U.S.
Central Intelligence Agency of favoring the COP’s candidate,
Ms. Fatima Jinnah. A major theme in virtually all the speeches by
Ayub’s ministers was Pakistan’s independent foreign policy, but
the essentials of that policy were left to Foreign Minister Zulfikar
Ali Bhutto, who virtually on the eve of the ballot declared Pakistan
was determined to liberate Kashmir from Indian occupation. In a
moment of high vitriol he declared that the Pakistan government,
following the election, would “take retaliatory steps to counter the
Indian attempt to merge the occupied parts of Kashmir with
India.” By contrast, Fatima Jinnah had mentioned sustaining
strong ties with the United States and although critical of India she
was less aggressive in defining the issues between the subconti-
nent’s principal rivals. Bhutto successfully shifted the campaign
toward foreign policy and there Fatima’s lack of experience was
publicly revealed. Bhutto was less interested in what the Basic
Democrats wanted to hear, however. Bhutto’s audience was his
mass public and he was not about to disappoint them. Moreover,
Ayub was not expected to lose the election, and the Foreign
Minister wanted it known that the moment to settle matters with
India was fast approaching.

In the end, the Basic Democrats, by a close margin, voted to elect
Ayub Khan. The Field Marshal, however, was denied a mandate
and had it not been for the exploitation of the Kashmir dispute in



Years of War 103

West Pakistan, Ayub might well have suffered a humiliating defeat.
Bhutto received all the credit for the victory. Moreover, he had
demonstrated that emotional issues trump solid and more mean-
ingful debate. Ayub had endeavored to overcome the deficiencies in
his government, to broaden its base, to appeal to the alienated, and
to accelerate the development process, but he found himself
blindsided by the Kashmir dilemma. Nothing rallied the West
Pakistani masses like the call to liberate Kashmir. Bhutto had
promised freedom for the Kashmiri people, and the political
opposition, especially the more radical Islamists, raised the volume
by calling for a return on that pledge. Ayub had no intention of
going to war, but the momentum favored the four horsemen of the
apocalypse and the Field Marshal was helpless to prevent them
from trampling on his best-laid plans for the revival of Pakistan.

The Pakistan–India war of 1965 and its aftermath

Ayub had yielded command of the army to General Mohammad
Musa soon after the declaration of martial law. Moreover, he was
too preoccupied with the affairs of state to be privy to all the
discussions and decisions confronting the army high command.
Trusting his fellow officers, he enjoyed their loyalty, but his
aloofness from their day-to-day deliberations prevented him from
understanding the shift in army thinking. India’s inability to
effectively counter the Chinese thrust into its territory in 1962 was
examined in considerable detail by the Pakistan high command.
Ayub’s reluctance to take advantage of India’s demonstrated
feebleness had been a major subject of discussion among high-
ranking officers, and Bhutto’s more defiant posture provided him
with access to their deliberations. Bhutto had registered a
commitment during the election campaign that could not be
ignored, and the moment to strike in Kashmir seemed opportune
while India was still licking its wounds. Moreover, the sudden
death of Jawaharlal Nehru had added to India’s demoralization.
The Indian leadership was reported to be in disarray and unable to
move on the diplomatic or military fronts. Finally, Lal Bahadur
Shastri was considered a curious choice for the leadership of India.
Pakistani intelligence described him as weak, colorless, ineffectual,
and with little stomach for war.



104 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

In addition, in April 1965, only months after the Pakistan
election, Indian and Pakistani forces had clashed in the swampy
region that marked the southern border between the two
countries. The Rann of Kutch was an uninhabited territory, of
no serious consequence to either country that separated the two
countries on the Arabian Sea. The Kutch encounter was brief,
Pakistan apparently getting the better of the Indian force. And
although the dispute demarcating the precise border was subse-
quently transferred to an international arbitration panel, Pakistan
had sensed a weakness in the Indian armed forces that it believed it
could exploit in Kashmir. Plans therefore went forward for
precipitating a conflict in Kashmir that would finally give Pakistan
the victory it had long sought.

Ayub’s success in reining in his forces following the Rann of
Kutch skirmish did not sit well with the more hawkish military
commanders. Nor did Bhutto believe that Ayub’s insistence on
diplomatic solutions in Pakistan’s dealings with India would work.
Ayub could not challenge the argument offered by his detractors
that the Pakistani soldiers were superior to the Indian, and that
despite the latter’s numbers Pakistani arms could prevail over
India’s in any serious engagement. The Rann of Kutch incident was
blown out of all proportion to the actual circumstances and made
to appear as convincing proof that Ayub’s hesitation was uncalled
for. Military strategists also pointed to the question of timing. The
United States, despite Pakistani protests, had transferred weapons
to India, and in due course those weapons and the training
provided by the Americans could make India a more formidable
adversary. Pakistan’s own dependence on United States arms was
not factored into this equation. Indeed, anti-Americanism was
more apparent now than earlier and Pakistanis were led to believe
China would be a better ally. Beijing, it was said, could supply
Pakistan with needed military equipment and there was no longer a
need to look to the Americans. Ayub rejected such thinking and
informed his comrades there would be no shift in alliances, that
Pakistan intended to maintain solid relations with both the United
States and China, and that the Pakistani forces were becoming a
formidable presence. A breakthrough had been in the offing just
before Nehru’s death, and Ayub argued that a strong Pakistan
would yet bring the Indian leaders to the conference table.



Years of War 105

Again, Ayub’s conservatism was not welcome. Nor did his
success in the Basic Democracies polling calm the Pakistani public
or reduce the criticism directed against his administration. Ayub
made every effort to turn the public dialogue to the matter of
nation building and, with substantial donor aid, there was
progress to report. Moreover, the private sector had shown signs
of recovery and along with the expansion of the public
corporations, unemployment had been reduced and a large
portion of the population could access the open market. Domestic
products mixed with imported goods to satisfy demand across a
broad spectrum of wants, and by the summer of 1965 it appeared
Pakistan had made headway in constructing a more formidable
economic base. It was during this period of otherwise relative
calm that information was circulated describing altercations in
Kashmir that had caused an unusual loss of life. The Pakistan
Foreign Ministry released a number of stories describing
atrocities committed by Indian forces, although observers on
the scene could not corroborate the reports. Jingoism on both
sides had long been a part of the Kashmir conflict, but this time
it was the Pakistani press that picked up the story and spread it
countrywide.

According to Altaf Gauhar, Ayub’s Minister of Information, in
Ayub’s absence Bhutto called a cabinet meeting in late July 1965
to inform the highest-ranking officers in the Pakistan army that a
“popular revolt” had broken out in Kashmir and that the situation
was desperate. He reportedly told the generals the country could
not stand by and do nothing. Bhutto is said to have left the
meeting before he could be questioned. The army commander,
General Musa, was described as shocked by the presentation and
unable to understand its source. Nevertheless, on August 8 the
Pakistan army launched “Operation Gibraltar.” The operation
was described as an aggressive, small-unit penetration of Indian
lines in Kashmir, and apparently was directed by Inter-Services
Intelligence (ISI). The clandestine operation, however, was
uncovered prior to the initial action and before it reached its first
objective the force was repulsed. What Bhutto failed to reveal in
his July meeting was now a lead story on All-India Radio.
Pakistani insurgents had attempted to precipitate a conflict and all
the infiltrators had been either killed or captured. Bhutto and his



106 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Foreign Secretary, Aziz Ahmad, had planned the operation after
drawing upon the expertise of Akbar Khan, the discredited general
behind the Rawalpindi Conspiracy. Ayub had not been consulted
about the ISI operation. Nor was he informed of Bhutto’s role in
masterminding the assault. Indeed, it is difficult to believe that had
Ayub known of Akbar Khan’s involvement he would have
approved the action. Events, however, were again in the saddle.
Conspired against by ambitious personalities, the events of July
and August 1965 undermined Ayub’s authority and seriously
damaged his administration. Ayub had to accept responsibility for
the setback. In addition he could not take disciplinary action
against Bhutto without causing deep rifts in the army. Ayub was
trapped in a “Catch 22” and unable to extricate himself from
what would become an even deeper dilemma.

Despite the more secretive aspects of the Kashmir operation, the
President had been given a Kashmir position paper in December
1964 which he had not thoroughly digested. The election
campaign was in its final stages and all Ayub’s attention was
riveted on winning a major electoral victory. When Ayub finally
got around to reading the document it was some months later.
Gauhar reveals that he rejected the strategy as the work of
uninformed lay amateurs who knew nothing about military
formations and tactics. The plan, however, did not die. Bhutto
tried to convince Ayub that the seizure of Kashmir would provide
Pakistan with a balance of power in the region. It would also win
Ayub new popularity and improve the prospects for Pakistan’s
development. Bhutto also addressed the need to shift dependence
from the United States to a more secure alignment with
neighboring China. The 1963 China–Pakistan border settlement
was only the beginning of what Bhutto envisaged as a new
relationship with the world’s most populous nation. Under-
standing Ayub’s aversion to joining a major cold war adversary
of the United States, Bhutto tried to convince Ayub that China’s
proximity and friendship was a far better guarantee of Pakistani
security. Bhutto’s interest in the China connection, however, went
even further. Pakistan, he said, would achieve greater international
respect and its more formidable position would rank it at the top
of all the Muslim nations. Bhutto’s geopolitical vision centered on
lifting Pakistan from its South Asian confines to make it an



Years of War 107

integral part of the Middle East. But the key issue in all his
machinations was the liberation of Kashmir.

Bhutto’s first goal was to win the support of the Pakistan army
high command. His persuasive powers were so formidable that even
General Musa complained to Ayub about his commanders being
“brainwashed.” When the decision finally was made to open the
campaign in Kashmir, even Ayub found difficulty in resisting
Bhutto’s thesis. Apprised of an impending war, however, New Delhi
was not idle. Army units were reinforced and Kashmiri dissidents
likely to support an invading Pakistan army were quickly rounded
up and imprisoned. If Pakistan anticipated surprise, the Pakistan
army failed to grasp India’s readiness or its overall strategy.
Moreover, if Pakistan expected a popular uprising, that did not
materialize. “Operation Gibraltar” was a complete failure. The
larger “Operation Grand Slam” also met with disaster.

Ayub was not immediately informed of these setbacks on the
battlefield. Nor was the Pakistani nation. To the contrary,
Pakistan’s propaganda machine pumped out the most optimistic
statements, leading the public to believe the Indians were in retreat
and that Kashmir would at long last be liberated. Ayub soon
learned otherwise and tried to salvage what he could from the
misadventure by reassigning the officers directing the fighting and
by deploying Pakistani forces in more defendable positions. Ayub
also had to contend with the American decision to assume a
neutral position. President Lyndon Johnson, who had succeeded
Kennedy following his assassination in 1963, placed an embargo
on arms to both India and Pakistan. That decision impacted on the
Pakistanis, who were totally dependent on American military
supplies. India, by contrast, was unaffected because it could
produce its own small weapons and also anticipated receiving
heavier arms shipments from the Soviet Union. Ayub knew he
could not fight a protracted war without American assistance and
given the failure of the initial operations, he now had to ponder
the possibility that the army could suffer major losses. Indeed,
India expanded the war to include the entire frontier with West
Pakistan. It had even launched air attacks against Pakistani
installations in East Pakistan. To avert a terrible disaster, Ayub
began looking for a way out and found it in the call for a cessation
of hostilities by the United Nations Security Council.



108 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

The end of the Ayub era

With the United States opting out, and no Muslim country coming
to Pakistan’s defense, the Soviet Union saw an opportunity to
bring Pakistan and India together. Moscow extended its good
offices and called for a meeting between the Pakistani President
and the Indian Prime Minister. At first Ayub was reluctant to
accept Moscow’s offer, but, given his lack of options, he eventually
agreed to meet his Indian counterpart in Soviet Central Asia.
Shastri was no more eager than Ayub to engage in peace talks.
India saw a Pakistan–China axis in the making, and Beijing’s
threat to again invade India’s northern territory was proof enough
of its collusion with Islamabad. Nevertheless, India too reluctantly
agreed to accept the Soviet invitation. Ayub ordered Bhutto to
Moscow to prepare for the summit conference, letting the
Pakistani public think Kashmir would be the subject of the talks.
Bhutto said nothing about Soviet complicity in or sustained
support for the Indian position on Kashmir. Nor was it ever
disclosed whether this preliminary meeting had any significance in
the subsequent discussions. Thus, the Pakistani public was still led
to believe a satisfactory settlement would be achieved or else
hostilities would resume.

Ayub arrived in Tashkent on January 3, 1966, accompanied by
Foreign Minister Bhutto. In spite of Bhutto’s earlier mission to
Moscow, the Pakistan side did not present an agenda, and Ayub
had to improvise his way through the talks. The parties quickly
revealed they were more immediately concerned with the
disengagement of forces and that a Kashmir settlement was not
in the works. Ayub wanted a pullback of troops in order to avoid a
renewal of hostilities. After achieving this objective he wanted to
end the talks so that he could return to Pakistan, where his army,
his administration, and his many development programs were
in disarray. Ayub knew he needed time to repair the damage
done to his army. He was also mindful that without a credible
military, loyal to its chief, his government could not be sustained.
In Pakistan, however, reports circulated that the two principals
were at an impasse over the Kashmir question, that no agreement
could be expected, and that Ayub would return to issue new orders
to his army to resume fighting. The obfuscation was obvious but it



Years of War 109

was soon made apparent that Ayub and Shastri had not journeyed
to Tashkent to accommodate each other’s more abiding interests.

The Soviet leaders had invested too much prestige in this
meeting to allow it to terminate without an agreement of some
kind. Thus, when the parties failed to find common ground, an
agreement was drafted by the Soviets, and Ayub and Shastri were
pressured to sign the document. The Tashkent Agreement said
nothing about the status of Kashmir but it did bring an end to the
Indo-Pakistani war of 1965. Ayub’s minimum demands were
granted when both sides agreed to pull back and reposition their
forces. Military commanders from both armies were formed into a
truce observation team and ordered by their respective governments
to supervise the disengagement. Joint military sites were located
on both sides of the line of control, but the Kashmir question still
demanded a response. A final solution to the Kashmir problem
would have to wait on the wisdom of future statesmen.

Not a Kashmir settlement, but rather Bhutto’s decision to leave
the Ayub government was the most dramatic outcome of
Tashkent. Bhutto’s strategy involved exploiting Ayub’s weakness.
Seeing that Ayub had been made more vulnerable and was not
likely to perpetuate his rule, Bhutto plotted his future and meant
to reap advantages from his astounding popularity. Appealing to
people representing a broad spectrum of Pakistani society, Bhutto
played to the crowd and made it appear that only he wanted and
could achieve a Kashmir settlement. Young people were especially
entranced by his rhetoric. Moreover, Ayub had no counter. Few
were prepared to believe that Bhutto’s audacious behavior had
prompted the war, and the President held his silence on the matter.
Ayub had known for some time that Bhutto’s aspirations would
not be appeased with service in his administration. But he also was
mindful of Bhutto’s importance to the regime, and he could not
bring himself to dismiss him. Ayub feared that a sudden decision
to dismiss Bhutto from the cabinet would only provide him with
greater opportunity to damage the administration. Ayub therefore
demanded that the Foreign Minister stay at his post until Ayub
was prepared to remove him.

On the night following the signing of the Tashkent Agreement,
Lal Bahadur Shastri suffered a heart attack and before medical
assistance could be summoned he passed away. Ayub asked Bhutto



110 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

to escort the body back to New Delhi. Ayub returned to Pakistan
without his Foreign Minister and faced a grieving public, not
because they mourned the death of the Indian Prime Minister, but
because Ayub had failed to measure up to their expectations. Ayub
was never the same following the 1965 war. His confidence
shaken, the Field Marshal, who once believed it possible to shape
Pakistan’s destiny, no longer held to that opinion. For Ayub it was
now a question not of whether to step aside, but of when and how.
Events had overwhelmed him. Too dependent on his staff and too
ready to delegate responsibility, Ayub lost the authoritarian
instinct. He showed himself to be a poor judge of human
character, especially in some of the men chosen to surround him.
Ayub was used and ultimately abused by those who never shared
his ideas. Among this group, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was the most
obvious and by far the most unscrupulous.

A March 1966 visit to Pakistan by Chinese leaders brought tens
of thousands of Pakistanis into the streets to welcome them. The
outpouring was described as a demonstration of appreciation for
China’s efforts on behalf of Pakistan during the 1965 war. The
display was unprecedented. Moreover, Bhutto, still the country’s
Foreign Minister, had the opportunity to share in the acclaim as he
rode with the visitors through the streets of Pakistan’s capital.
Ayub had declined to participate in the festivities and his absence
from the ceremony was yet another misreading of events. The
adulation heaped on the Chinese also washed over Bhutto. Bhutto
seemed incapable of doing wrong and his popularity had soared to
new levels when Ayub finally decided to accept his resignation.
Once on his own, Bhutto was not expected to quietly retire from
the political scene. On the contrary, the young man immediately
searched for the political party that best represented his views.
Finding none, he came under the influence of people who wanted
to establish a new national party, and it was not long afterwards
that he assisted in the formation of the Pakistan People’s Party.

Ayub reshuffled his government following Bhutto’s departure.
He made General Musa governor of West Pakistan and named
General Mohammad Yahya Khan as commander of the Pakistan
army. His new cabinet attempted to draw upon the expertise of
technicians and scholars as well as politicians but Ayub was left
with one intimate, the Minister for Information and Broadcasting,



Years of War 111

Altaf Gauhar. When Bhutto began his verbal assault on Ayub, the
President had few defenses and with the exception of Gauhar no
one who could represent his true intentions. In November 1966,
Bhutto accused Ayub of poor administration and divisive policies.
To demonstrate that he was a bridge builder and a national healer,
Bhutto announced his support for Mujibur Rahman’s Six Point
Program, which he had earlier condemned as secessionist and
calculated to destroy Pakistan. Gauhar tried to level the playing
field with a ploy of his own. The Information Minister declared
Bhutto continued to own vast holdings in India and was in fact an
Indian citizen. Bhutto was able to deflect the charge, but the
government fought back, hinting that Bhutto’s embrace of Mujib
associated him with a known traitor. Mujib had been arrested for
what the government reported was a serious attempt to break up
the country. Accused of clandestinely working with Indian
diplomats, Mujib was indicted in the “Agartala Conspiracy”
and threatened with either execution or a long jail term.

The Pakistan People’s Party (PPP) was officially organized in
1967 by a small group of left-leaning intellectuals. Bhutto assumed
the post of Chairman of the party and his General Secretary was
J.A. Rahim, a former civil servant and avowed Communist. The
Pakistan Communist Party had been banned in 1955, but Rahim
continued to represent Marxist views. Rahim, much older than
Bhutto, was a paternal figure to the young politician, and the spirit
behind the PPP. It was he who convinced Bhutto to help form a
new party rather than take on the baggage of one of the existing
organizations. Moreover, Bhutto’s enormous popularity was
forecast to sky-rocket the PPP into first position among all
Pakistan’s political organizations. The PPP put Ayub on notice
that if he intended remaining in power, he would have to confront
political maneuvering never before experienced in Pakistan.

During this period of increased political activity, Ayub fell
victim to pneumonia complicated by a pulmonary embolism.
Though little was offered the public in the way of details, Ayub
was incapacitated and questions were raised about his life
expectancy. Against the odds, however, the President rallied and
made what was described as a full recovery. He returned to the
duties of state hardly a month after being stricken. Weak from the
ordeal, however, he confided in those closest to him that he did not



112 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

expect to remain head of state much longer. Policies were therefore
in train to prepare the succession, and the generals jockeyed for
position, believing one of their own would replace Ayub as
President of Pakistan.

Ayub again had been made a creature of events. During his
illness his cabinet had taken the decision to highlight the “Decade
of Ayub Khan.” The administration wanted to display its
accomplishments in the ten years the Field Marshal had ruled
Pakistan. The program was officially called the “Decade of
Development” and, though in itself an innocent gesture of breast-
beating, its impact on the general public was anything but
positive. The political opposition questioned the expense of
mounting such a celebration. They also questioned its utility and
purpose. Concluding it was assembled to portray the Ayub decade
as something beneficial to the nation, its only real beneficiary, they
concluded, was Ayub Khan. Protest meetings opposed to the
celebration took to the streets and the violence they engendered
surprised most members of the administration. The politicians
needed an issue to open their campaign against Ayub, and the
spark for this latest example of anti-social behavior was the
planned but not yet realized celebration. Confirmation that this
was a broad undertaking, planned well in advance of the “Decade”
being declared, came from the role played by the religious
fraternity. The latter’s assault on the Muslim Family Laws that had
been introduced to provide protection for women and children
pointed to a concerted attempt by the opposition to eliminate
everything Ayub had accomplished during his tenure. The Family
Laws had done much to advance the idea of equality between the
sexes, as well as to provide material assistance for children and the
indigent, but the Islamists still found reason to describe it as anti-
Islam and blasphemous. The Islamic Research Institute also came
under intense fire from the Islamists. Both the Family Laws and
the administration’s family planning program were condemned as
counter to Islamic practices. The learned director of the Research
Institute, a major scholar of Islamic jurisprudence, was targeted
for advocating contraception, and because threats were made on
his life he had to flee the country.

Bhutto’s paradoxical behavior in all these matters was seldom
questioned by those opposed to the Ayub system. Bhutto gave



Years of War 113

voice to any criticism directed against the administration, despite
his long-term service as a minister in a number of key positions.
Moreover, though he associated with socialist doctrines, he saw
nothing contradictory in merging Islamic issues with Marxist
rhetoric. The PPP Manifesto was released to frame the party’s
program. It avoided all references to theological matters but it was
a Marxist-Leninist reminder that the party’s work was centered on
Pakistan’s proletariat and the population’s need for “bread,
clothing, and shelter.” Bhutto wanted it known that only the
PPP represented the poor. He also wanted it known that he was a
crusader who would bring an end to corruption and autocratic
rule.

Bhutto claimed the power both to deliver democratic reforms
and to protect the country’s Islamic heritage. All things to all men
and women in the country, Bhutto resisted all appeals that he
moderate his rhetoric or change course. In the meantime, rioting
had broken out in East Pakistan and quickly spread to the western
province. Ayub called for the imprisonment of all those
responsible for disturbing the peace, but it was a monumental
task that neither the police nor the army was ready to tackle.
Moreover, members of the army high command had decided it
was time for Ayub to go. Divisions within the ranks were apparent
after the 1965 war, but they were even more obvious during
Ayub’s illness. The time seemed opportune for a changing of the
guard, and a number of key army officers believed the army’s
honor, sullied in the aftermath of the 1965 war, could be restored
if Ayub were forced to vacate his office. Ayub, however, was not
yet prepared to go.

While he tried to keep the army intact, Ayub was also concerned
about the future of the political system he had given so much to
construct. Convinced that the presidential system was better for
Pakistan than another parliamentary experiment, Ayub wanted
assurances that his wishes would be honored following his
retirement. Events, however, were already beyond Ayub’s control.
The “Decade of Development” celebration had opened all the old
wounds. In spite of the incarceration of much of the political
opposition, including Bhutto, the riots continued to spread and
intensify. In desperation, Ayub reversed his order and called for
the release of the politicians. Even Mujibur Rahman, whose



114 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

conspiracy trial was in process, saw the charges withdrawn and
the case closed. Ayub called upon all the politicians to meet with
him in an effort to return the country to a semblance of order.
Some complied with this request, but others refused to participate
in a meeting that they assumed was aimed at extending Ayub’s
tenure in office.

Bhutto publicly declared his vote of no confidence in his former
mentor, and even Manzur Qadir was heard calling on Ayub to step
aside. Ayub Khan wanted a propitious moment to yield his
authority, but his physical weakness was matched by mental
fatigue. Though reluctant to leave office under pressure, in the end
he wanted nothing more than to leave the presidency with his
dignity intact. Only when his brothers in arms no longer found it
possible to pledge their unconditional loyalty did he finally agree
to give up the role he had filled for more than ten years. His final
decision was to transfer authority, not to an interim civilian
government, but to the army commander-in-chief, General Aga
Mohammad Yahya Khan. Martial law was again imposed, and
Ayub Khan, after more than a decade as the supreme leader, took
his leave. Ayub retreated to his home, where he would live out his
last years in relatively quiet contemplation. On March 25, 1969,
the nation was told it would have to endure the presidency of yet
another uniformed officer.

The Yahya Khan interregnum and the civil war

Yahya Khan had been selected by Ayub to salvage what he could
from the ill-fated strategy to liberate Kashmir in 1965. It was
Yahya who oversaw the consolidation of the few gains Pakistan
reaped from the conflict and who prevented the army from
splitting into different factions. For his service, Ayub promoted
Yahya to commander-in-chief of the army in spite of his junior
standing among the higher-ranking officers. Commissioned in
1938, he served in the Middle East and Italy during World War II.
After Pakistan was created he was instrumental in the development
of the Army Staff College at Quetta. Made a brigadier at age
thirty-four, he was subsequently transferred to army headquarters,
where he assisted Ayub in the modernization of the Pakistan army.
The youngest officer to be promoted to the rank of Major-General,



Years of War 115

Ayub named him his chief of staff just before martial law was
declared in 1958. Yahya remained at Ayub’s side throughout the
forty-four months of martial law and the two men developed a
close working relationship. Yahya worked with American military
advisers in integrating U.S.-provided weapons systems in the
Pakistan army. He also was made responsible for supervising the
construction of the new capital of Islamabad, having served on the
commission that recommended the project and later as the
chairman of the Capital Development Authority that prepared
the overall plan. Promoted to Lieutenant-General for his perfor-
mance in the 1965 war, when he took command of the army in
1966 he was confronted not only with healing the psychological
wounds, but with repairing the physical damage done to the armed
forces by a misguided group of high military officers.

Ayub selected the only officer in the Pakistan army he believed
he could trust to sustain what he had started. He also anticipated
Yahya would perpetuate the presidential system. Yahya, however,
had his own political agenda and shortly after taking control of
the government he issued an order abrogating the Ayub constitu-
tion. He also declared his preference for the parliamentary system
and promised to reinstate the political parties once the country’s
equilibrium had been restored. He also needed time to heal the rift
with the United States. Richard Nixon’s ascendancy to the
American presidency in 1969 and Henry Kissinger’s selection as
Nixon’s National Security Adviser were both judged pluses for
Yahya’s objectives. For the moment, however, Yahya’s concerns
were more domestic than foreign.

On March 30, 1970 Yahya issued a Legal Framework Order,
breaking up the One Unit of West Pakistan and reconstituting the
original four provinces. Punjab, Balochistan, Sindh, and the North
West Frontier Province (NWFP) were to have their own legislative
assemblies, along with East Pakistan. A National Assembly was to
be constituted that would be divided between East Pakistan and
the western provinces, the former receiving a larger proportion of
the seats as a consequence of its greater population. Yahya had
served as the General Officer Commanding in East Pakistan and
he credited himself with a peculiar sensitivity to Bengali issues.
The Yahya reforms appeared to be a welcome change from the
more arbitrary politics of the Ayub years, but Yahya would soon



116 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

learn how his well-meaning intentions would play out in the arena
of Pakistani opinion.

Ayub’s Basic Democracies system was scrapped with virtually
all the other institutions associated with the fallen leader. Indirect
elections for the office of President went with the banishing of the
Basic Democrats. According to Yahya, the people wanted
accountable and responsible leaders and a political system they
could readily embrace as legitimate and popular. Chastened by a
bitter war and hopeful that the Kashmir issue could be placed on
the back burner, Yahya saw his task as the healing of internal
wounds, most of them self-inflicted. But Yahya was not an
absolute dictator, nor did he stand alone among the generals under
his command. More readily identified as a chairman of a board of
strong military associates, Yahya found it necessary to filter his
vision through an army junta representing diverse views. Among
the ruling elite were those sanctioning a more liberal attitude and
others who argued for firm and determined decision making.
Consensus within the junta was important but it was soon
apparent that the more conservative members in the ruling circle
held sway over those calling for greater flexibility. Moreover,
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto had become an even more imposing figure
after Ayub’s departure. Popularly credited with the Field Marshal’s
resignation, Bhutto sustained his connections with the conservative
wing of the junta, and projected an even higher profile when
political party activity was reinstated on January 1, 1970.

Under pressure from the politicians, Yahya announced Pakistan’s
first national election. It was scheduled for October 5, 1970, and a
new National Assembly was to be convened shortly thereafter.
Yahya had turned the clock back to 1955, some time before the
Ayub era and just following the dissolution of the first Constituent
Assembly. The overall idea was to provide Pakistan with a second
chance at building a constitutional order based upon democratic
principles and reflecting the concerns of its people, both east and
west. The Legal Framework Order (LFO) had been generally well
received by the politicians although some in West Pakistan
wondered about the granting of a majority of National Assembly
seats to East Pakistan. Nevertheless, the general impression was
that Bhutto stood to gain the most from Yahya’s actions. Bhutto
was perceived as gaining particular advantage from the break-up



Years of War 117

of One Unit. Not only did he demonstrate impressive control over
the Sindh constituency, he also had expanded his influence in the
Punjab. By contrast, East Pakistan was seen as equally divided
between Mujibur Rahman’s Awami League and Maulana
Bhashani’s National Awami Party (NAP). East Pakistan’s majority
distribution of National Assembly seats was expected to divide
between the two principal parties and even the PPP was projected
to win seats there. Election forecasts therefore predicted a
Pakistan People’s Party victory. Moreover, the Awami League
and NAP were not expected to develop a national following, nor
were the provincial parties of the NWFP and Balochistan expected
to transcend their immediate circumstances. Only the PPP seemed
to represent national interests, and all the surveys pointed to a
solid victory for the socialist organization.

Not all the generals were satisfied with the LFO. Several within
the junta were opposed to granting East Pakistan majority
representation in the central legislature. Nonetheless, the LFO
stood, and the army officers as well as the politicians were forced
to accept the reality of Yahya’s reform program. Any turning back
at this stage would be seen as doing severe damage to an already
fragile edifice. For his part, however, Bhashani described the LFO
as a “Trojan Horse,” a subterfuge that would divide East Bengal
and perpetuate West Pakistani dominance. Mujib also was less
than assured about the Yahya proposals. Fearing Bhashani’s
rejection of the LFO would win the favor of a vast number of
Bengalis, Mujib also demanded more from Yahya. The Bengali
complaint centered on the distribution of the country’s assets and
especially West Pakistan’s more significant development program.
A more equitable share of the country’s resources was one
demand; another was the plea that the two wings of the country
enjoy freely convertible currencies. According to Mujib, only the
provincial units, not the central government, should have the
power to tax their citizens.

The Awami League demands caused considerable distress within
the junta. The army high command was especially unhappy with
Mujib’s insistence on autonomy for East Pakistan, and a central
government restricted to responsibilities in defense and foreign
affairs. Mujib also wanted East Pakistan to engage in international
trade and to be allowed to open a separate foreign exchange



118 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

account. The Awami League call for a provincial militia that
would manage the province’s internal security and negate the need
to station large numbers of federal soldiers in the province was
especially galling. The junta had never taken Mujib into their
confidence and they were now even more convinced that his goal
was the break-up of Pakistan. Bhutto, by contrast, was privy to
the junta’s deliberations and indeed the junta had even sought his
counsel. Although momentarily embracing Mujib in the campaign
to end Ayub’s rule, Bhutto did not like Mujib and the Bengali
leader had no more respect for the former Ayub confidant. Each
man judged the other a crass opportunist and there was little
likelihood that they would ever again find common ground.

Flooding, an annual occurrence in East Pakistan, caused the
postponement of the much heralded first national elections, and
the October polling was shifted to December. That postponement
proved to be a fatal error. On November 12, 1970, a tidal wave
described as thirty feet in height and whipped by cyclone winds of
up to 120 miles per hour struck the coastal districts of East
Pakistan. Described as one of the worst natural catastrophes in
modern history, the storm totally destroyed the area of impact and
washed out to sea an estimated more than one million people.
Relief assistance was urgent and the call went out to the
government in West Pakistan to lend all assistance at the earliest
moment. President Yahya Khan was en route back to Pakistan
from China when the disaster hit and his government was slow to
respond to the request for assistance. In fact, Yahya had set down
in Dacca but had not been fully apprised of the situation when he
flew on to Islamabad.

Not only was the Pakistan government judged inept, but the
Bengalis condemnedwhat they believedwas the callous indifference
of West Pakistanis. By the time Yahya returned to East Pakistan to
see first hand the extent of the devastation it was too late to soothe
the feelings of the Bengali population. Moreover, aid sent to the
most affected areas was minimal and were it not for international
relief agencies little would have been done to relieve the plight of
the survivors. Mujib and Bhashani were indignant and decried the
overt lack of concern in the western wing. Both spoke for the
Bengali nation, Mujib reasserting the imperative of autonomy,
while Bhashani denounced the Islamabad government. Noting the



Years of War 119

inability of the West Pakistanis to register their humanity,
Bhashani also questioned his Pakistani citizenship. In an angry
address to his party members, he announced the NAP would
boycott the December elections.

Pakistan’s first national election proved to be still another
disaster. With the NAP boycotting the balloting, the Awami
League of Mujibur Rahman won almost all the contested seats set
aside for East Pakistan in the new National Assembly – but did not
gain a single seat in any of the West Pakistan provinces. In West
Pakistan, Bhutto’s PPP won the Punjab and Sindh province but
lost to provincial coalitions in the NWFP and Balochistan. The
election results pointed to the absence of a single national party.
Pakistan was a divided state and the elections revealed how deeply
divided it was. Provincialism not nationalism was the essential
dynamic and the years of primitive politics had taken their toll.
The country’s political life had been stunted, first, by the failure of
the Muslim League to develop into a proper political organization
and, second, by the long period of martial law and military
dominance. Not only was the political process atrophied, but
almost from the moment of independence feudalism, personal
vendettas, sectarian strife, and provincial rivalries had limited any
kind of political progress.

With the ballots counted and the Awami League holding a
majority of the seats in the National Assembly, the expectation
was that Yahya would call Mujib to form the new central
government. Mujib’s party controlled 169 of the three hundred
seats in the National Assembly; Bhutto’s PPP had won only eighty-
one, almost all from Sindh and Punjab. Yahya had declared the
substitution of the parliamentary for the now defunct presidential
system, but under pressure from the junta, and especially from
Bhutto, he hesitated in issuing the call to Mujib. Bhutto supported
the President’s reluctance to declare the Awami League the winner
of the election, arguing Mujib would represent only East Pakistan
if made Prime Minister. Demands emerged from the PPP that the
election results be nullified and that new elections be contemplated.
Yahya was trapped in a no-win situation. Forced to choose
between the demands made on one side by Bhutto and his
conservative generals, and Mujib and an aroused Bengali public
on the other, Yahya’s immediate reaction was to postpone a



120 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

decision. Then Yahya called for a meeting of the principal parties.
Neither Mujib nor Bhutto, however, was agreeable to a discussion.
For the former, the election had been won fairly and the results
were clear. For the latter, the election results would confine the
PPP to an indefinite period in the opposition. Bhutto’s lack of
success in the frontier provinces also pointed to a possible Awami
League and frontier coalition that would permanently isolate
Bhutto’s socialist organization. Bhutto sensed the need to press
PPP policies now; to wait on events might ruin the organization’s
chances in the future. More important, Bhutto could lose the
opportunity for national leadership. Yahya allowed himself to
succumb to Bhutto’s pleadings. He also recognized that the junta
was equally unhappy with the Awami League victory and that the
concerns of his colleagues had to be given serious consideration.

The viceregal tradition, not parliamentary procedure, was at
work here. Yahya ignored his own proclamations and attempted
to use the office of the chief executive to manage what was
obviously a dangerous situation. The Bengalis exploded when they
realized Yahya had backed away from a sacred commitment.
Demonstrations were to be anticipated but no one envisaged the
intensity or the immediate spread of the disorder. Police agencies
were no answer to the problem. Moreover, Bengali police as well
as government officials left their posts in protest, and government
was paralyzed in all departments. Only the Pakistan army
garrisoned in the province was in position to deal with the rioters,
but even these troops were insufficient to restore peace. In the
meantime, the Pakistan army made preparations to send
additional soldiers to the region, and the generals least sympathetic
to the Bengali cause presided over the build-up. Given the
intransigence on all sides, East Pakistan’s request for autonomy
was transformed into a demand for secession, and the generals
were determined to retain the eastern province no matter the cost
in lives and property. East Pakistan’s sizeable Hindu minority was
placed at particular risk. The junta had spoken of Indian plots
aimed at dismembering the country, and they now convinced
themselves New Delhi was behind the uprising.

Pakistani troops, largely drawn from West Pakistan, were
instructed to believe that in fighting the local population they were
actually fighting India and a Hindu challenge to their Islamic



Years of War 121

tradition. The 1965 war was still fresh in the minds of the Pakistan
army jawans, and they required little encouragement in cracking
down on those they deemed to be enemies of Pakistan. Indeed,
much propaganda had been directed at the Punjab following the
election. Punjabis held minority status in the Pakistan constituted
in 1947, and now it seemed that the proud Punjabi would have to
submit to either Bengali or Sindhi rule, and neither was acceptable
to those believing they were a “superior” people. In the midst of
all this, the future of the country revolved around Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto.

Bhutto’s ambition never burned more intensely than after the
resignation of Ayub Khan. The Pakistan People’s Party was seen as
Bhutto’s transmission belt to the highest office. Having supported
Mujib’s autonomy program in the latter days of the Ayub era,
Bhutto had completely reversed course and denounced the Six
Point Program of the Awami League, describing it as anti-
Pakistan. Bhutto issued an ultimatum to Mujib and indirectly to
Yahya when he said he would refuse to meet with the Awami
League leader if he did not withdraw his demands for greater
provincial autonomy. Yahya’s reluctance to call Bhutto’s bluff, let
alone to ask Mujib to form a government, only protracted and
deepened the impasse. It seemed obvious to Mujib that Yahya had
given up the notion of even-handed treatment of the two wings of
the country. Yahya too, not just the members of the junta, would
not permit the Awami League to form the central government.
Although Mujib later agreed to accept Yahya’s call for a meeting
with Bhutto, he did not believe the General wanted a settlement
based upon the facts.

With street demonstrations rampaging through the towns and
villages of East Pakistan, high-positioned members of Bhutto’s PPP
journeyed to East Pakistan to meet with their counterparts in the
Awami League. Led by J.A. Rahim, the party’s Secretary General,
they agreed a plan that would call for the drafting of three separate
constitutions, one for East Pakistan, another for the provinces of
West Pakistan, and still another to represent the federal character
of the country. Believing such a plan was the only formula that
could prevent secession, the negotiators tried to sell their plan to
the army junta and to Chairman Bhutto. But before the junta could
respond, Bhutto emphatically rejected the proposal. Concluding



122 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

the central government could still come under Awami League
control, or remain the responsibility of the army, Bhutto saw little
personal loss in sustaining the impasse.

Moreover, the army was continuing to reinforce its garrison in
the eastern province, and in time Bhutto believed it would have the
capacity to silence the Bengalis and break the will of the Awami
League. Bhutto was aware of army plans to arrest Mujib and to
crush the Awami League’s militant shock troops. Bhutto saw the
Yahya-inspired negotiations as nothing more than a stunt, staged
to buy time for the army to mobilize sufficient forces to restore law
and order in the province and keep India from assisting the
Bengalis. Justification for a military assault on its own civilian
population was found in the Bengali attack on the refugee
community lodged in the province. “Biharis” was a term
attributed to all non-Bengalis living in East Pakistan, many of
whom had established themselves in relatively lucrative commercial
undertakings. This element of society had held managerial
positions in the province’s small industries. They also had been
favored with government positions and other offices of distinction.
Envy and rivalries between the different communities was a reality
of life in East Pakistan and it was not surprising that long-term
antagonisms surfaced when the province erupted after the
elections. The slaughter of the Biharis therefore was a pretext
for military action, and on the night of March 25, 1971 units of
the Pakistan army made their assault on the Awami League and
subsequently on an array of Bengali targets.

Among the first to be brutalized were students asleep in their
hostels at Dacca University. Awami Leaguers were rounded up
along with some of Dacca’s leading intellectuals. Taken to a remote
location, they were summarily executed. Mujib was arrested but
taken unharmed to West Pakistan, where he was cast into a prison
in the northern area of the country. Hindus were singled out from
other Bengalis and killed on the spot. The army strategy aimed at
eliminating anyone who it was believed could sustain resistance,
but the gross and senseless killing of the innocent imposed a
demand on all Bengalis to band together and to strike back.
Bengali members of the Pakistan army as well as the East Pakistan
militia defected with their arms to form the Mukhti Bahini or
Liberation Army and, joining with their besieged brethren,



Years of War 123

employed guerrilla tactics to resist the superior West Pakistani
forces. East Pakistan had been plunged into civil war and little
consideration had been given to its consequences.

Internationalizing a civil war

The army attack was against the people of Bengal. Muslims were
victimized as well as Hindus and no room remained for counter-
argument or for recognition of Bengal’s legitimate grievances. The
election results were all but forgotten and the bloodletting opened
wounds so deep that it was difficult to rationalize an outcome that
could leave Pakistan intact and viable. Mohammad Ali Jinnah’s
Pakistan was on the block and neither Yahya nor Bhutto nor any
of the generals or West Pakistani politicians seemed able to grasp
the consequences of the egregious action taken to suppress the
Bengali nation. Mujib’s arrest did not leave the Bengalis without
leaders, nor were Bengalis about to reduce their demands. The call
now was for independence. There would be no repeat of 1954,
when the results of the East Bengal provincial elections were
quashed. Nor would Bengal submit to viceregal rule or the
reincarnation of Iskandar Mirza. The brutal campaign against the
Bengali nation elevated Bengali resolve. Bangladesh replaced East
Pakistan as a government in exile, established across the border in
Indian Bengal, declared the sovereignty of the new state. Bengali
casualties were enormous, a consequence of the indiscriminate
slaughter of civilians by the Pakistan army. This carnage, however,
only increased Bengali determination to fight a protracted war.

When India cancelled Pakistan’s overflight privileges, supplying
the East Pakistan garrison became a time-consuming and costly
venture of moving men and equipment by sea, a route that
extended some three thousand miles. It was obvious Islamabad did
not have the means to sustain such a venture indefinitely, and the
Mukhti Bahini envisaged greater opportunities when this vulner-
ability became more pronounced. Complaints that Pakistan
registered in New Delhi went unanswered. The junta also
complained about India’s asylum procedures. Moreover, India
gave aid and comfort to the Bangladesh government in exile and
refused to acknowledge any of Islamabad’s concerns. New Delhi
also publicized its own complaints, particularly the flood of East



124 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Pakistani refugees washing across its border. Hundreds of
thousands were on the move; in time millions would seek the
protection of the Indian government. Many refugees were never
expected to return to East Bengal. The Pakistan army focused on
clearing the province of its entire Hindu population, but the flight
of Muslims had reached similar proportions.

Prime Minister Indira Gandhi publicly declared that her
government could not tolerate a continuation of the situation.
She said the number of refugees entering India had placed a great
burden on the entire nation and that resources were not sufficient
to cope with the problem. Moreover, there was a limit to her
government’s patience and she urged Islamabad to cease the use of
deadly force. Indira also warned Islamabad that India could not
stand idly by if conditions were allowed to worsen. Civil wars,
however, know no limits. Atrocities multiplied as the passions on
both sides intensified. The killing of non-Bengali officers of the
East Pakistan Rifles by deserting Bengali troops interfaced with
the Pakistan army’s massacre of Bengali intellectuals and
professionals. The total number of dead could not be calculated
but estimates ran as high as three million. Even if exaggerated, the
number revealed a terribly high price had been paid in realizing
the independence of Bangladesh.

Successive Pakistan governments had called for self-determination
in Kashmir, but self-determination in East Bengal was never
considered a reasonable demand. Bengali political consciousness
was not unknown to the minions in Islamabad, but they never
intended to honor the aspirations of this people who by 1971 had
little if any reason to consider themselves Pakistanis. A majority of
the Pakistan population, the Bengalis had long clamored for a fair
share of the political process. They also believed they were entitled
to a proportional cut of the economic bounty. East Pakistan’s jute
industry had kept the country afloat in the years immediately
following independence, but few profits were plowed back into
the province. Moreover, the economy had long been the preserve
of the non-Bengalis and they had little desire to use their largesse
for the province’s impoverished multitudes. The Bengalis had
come to see the government in West Pakistan as alien and another
version of colonial exploitation. The Islamabad government did
little to address Bengali suffering or change that perception of the



Years of War 125

government. Even Ayub’s plan to construct a “second capital” in
Dacca failed to excite people in the eastern province. Second best
was hardly a demonstration of power or resource sharing and the
scheme was ridiculed from the day it was presented. Bengalis
understood what it meant to be second-class citizens, they also
knew they would have to make great sacrifices to remove the
colonial yoke.

After Pakistan’s first national election, more attention might
have been given the Bengali complaint. Instead, Lieutenant-
General Tikka Khan, a soldier with a reputation for unbridled
combat, was unleashed on a relatively defenseless people.
Dehumanization is not uncommon in war, even civil war, and
Tikka conditioned his men to see the Bengalis as unrepentant
savages. But even Tikka was unable to cow the Bengali resistance
or break its resolve. The war raged on as the Bengalis divided into
small units and struck at targets of opportunity, often in the dead
of night. With neither side in a position to win an all-out victory,
the conflict deepened and the hatreds intensified. The protracted
nature of the struggle meant the war became front-page headlines
in distant places around the globe. No one, however, not the even
the United Nations, let alone any other organization, possessed
the leverage to bring the hostilities to an end.

Whatever their explanations, no nations truly attempted
mediation. The United States government, caught up in a war in
Southeast Asia, had little stomach to intervene in this one. The
war raging in East Bengal, however, did not prevent President
Richard Nixon from sending his National Security Advisor, Henry
Kissinger, to Islamabad. Kissinger did not go to the Pakistani
capital to offer his good offices or to bring pressure on Yahya to
halt the hostilities. Kissinger’s mission, with Yahya’s cooperation,
was to secretly travel to Beijing where he was to meet with Mao
Zedong and open a new chapter in Sino-American relations. The
civil war in East Bengal was not allowed to interfere with that
mission, and the American administration demonstrated calculated
indifference either to Bengali suffering or India’s plight in caring
for millions of refugees.

Only when New Delhi announced its patience was at an end did
the world begin to take serious notice of the civil war. Indira
Gandhi called for international recognition of Bangladesh’s



126 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

declaration of independence. In November 1971, Indian forces
crossed into Pakistani territory and Yahya informed the U.N.
Secretary General of the incursion and declared that New Delhi’s
objective was the dismemberment of Pakistan. If India did not halt
its operations the chances of a wider conflict could not be
discounted. The U.N. Security Council took up the issue but it was
clear from the outset that nothing could be done to address the
conflict. Too much time had passed and too many deaths had
occurred for either India or Pakistan to reconsider its options. The
Security Council voted to demand India’s withdrawal but New
Delhi was too committed to comply. By November 21, Indian
forces had eliminated Pakistan’s advance emplacements and
several Indian divisions were poised for a massive attack against
the Pakistani army garrison, now effectively cut off by air and sea
blockade. Inaccessible to fresh troops or supplies, the Pakistan
position was hopeless. Mukhti Bahini forces joined the Indians for
a final assault on the Pakistani troops, who had been ordered to
fight to the last man. Tikka had been called back to Islamabad
earlier and it was another Pakistani general who faced the task of
sacrificing thousands of his men or suffering the humiliation of
total capitulation.

On December 3, Pakistan aircraft attacked Indian positions,
and New Delhi gave the order for a full frontal assault. The second
Pakistan–India war in six years found Pakistan at a gross
disadvantage. India could move as many men and supplies into
the struggle as it saw fit. Pakistan had only its East Pakistan
garrison and the supplies still remaining after months of civil war.
With the Mukhti Bahini striking at will and Indian formations
rolling toward Dacca, the Pakistan cause lost its meaning.
Although it appeared a fight to the death was about to occur,
the Pakistani commander decided to surrender his forces. The war
was over. Ninety-three thousand Pakistani soldiers were taken
prisoner by the Indian army. Bangladesh became a reality.
Pakistan suffered the loss of one-fifth of its territory and more
than half of its population.

India played midwife to the creation of Bangladesh. Without
New Delhi’s support it is likely the civil war would have dragged
on for years in the form of guerrilla insurgency. But that is so much
speculation. Bangladesh had emerged as an independent state.



Years of War 127

Pakistan as it was known before the civil war had ceased to exist.
The dismembered country had suffered a grievous blow. Its armed
forces had been humiliated. Tens of thousands of Pakistani soldiers
languished as prisoners of war in Indian or Bangladeshi detention
camps. Citing the magnitude of the Pakistani defeat, some Indian
leaders called for spreading the war to West Pakistan. Their
objective was the complete destruction of Pakistan. Less hawkish
members of Indira’s government were more cautious, wary of
international opinion. Nonetheless, India had opened a front
against West Pakistan. The Pakistan navy lost many of its frontline
vessels and Pakistan’s coastal installations, especially around
Karachi, had been destroyed. The Pakistan airforce was outgunned
and in short order neutralized as an effective weapon. No Muslim
country came to Pakistan’s assistance, or even decried the Indian
action. The American embargo on arms to Pakistan, imposed
during the 1965 war, had not been lifted, even after the Kissinger
mission. Pakistan’s defeat on the battlefield was complete. The
Pakistani junta was left to contemplate the strategic consequences
of its misguided operations in East Bengal, and to confront a
desolate and demoralized nation in what remained of the country.

Although no country had come to their defense, some Pakistanis
had found hope in President Nixon’s decision to send the aircraft
carrier Enterprise into the Bay of Bengal. Believing the American
naval presence was meant to pressure New Delhi, it was the only
positive gesture Pakistanis could point to as they wallowed in the
despair of their terrible loss. India, of course, was not intimidated
by the American action, and Washington admitted that the carrier
force was deployed to retrieve Americans from the war zone, and
not to threaten India. In effect, Pakistan had nothing positive to
steel its resolve. India could strike the country at will and there
was little that Pakistan’s armed forces could do in its defense.
Acknowledging its gross errors as well as the calumny of its
actions, the junta understood the time had come for it to
relinquish power.

Just before the Indian assault on East Pakistan, Bhutto had been
summoned to a meeting of the military high command and had
been made Deputy Prime Minister. He had urged the generals to
make “total war” on India, but subsequent events proved that was
an impossible prospect. Bhutto pled Pakistan’s case before the



128 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

United Nations Security Council, but that too did little more than
allow the PPP leader to inflate his rhetoric. At one point, Bhutto
fulminated that even if Pakistan lost 120 million people it would
still survive. Bhutto’s exaggerated oratory was well known and
few observers were surprised when in the course of a U.N. debate
he suddenly announced he would return to Pakistan, where his
people thirsted for his leadership. Given to high drama, Bhutto
was in Dacca the night the army assaulted the students in their
beds. Returning to Pakistan the following day, he remarked at the
airport that Pakistan had been “saved.” From Bhutto’s posturing
at that time, as well as during the civil war, it was apparent his
ambition overrode his sense of reality. Bhutto wanted supreme
power at any price and events had converged to give substance to
his ruminations. On returning from New York City, Yahya
resigned the presidency and in his last public act notified the
nation that Zulfikar Ali Bhutto had agreed to become the new
President of Pakistan. The ambitious twenty-nine-year-old in Ayub
Khan’s first cabinet had achieved his goal at age forty-two.

Bibliography
Choudhury, G.W., The Last Days of United Pakistan, Bloomington:

Indiana University Press, 1974.
Feldman, Herbert, From Crisis to Crisis, Pakistan 1962–1969, London:

Oxford University Press, 1972.
Feldman, Herbert, The End and the Beginning: Pakistan 1960–1971,

Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1975.
Gauhar, Altaf, Ayub Khan: Pakistan’s First Military Ruler, Lahore: Sang-

e-Meel, 1994.
Inayat, M.R., ed., Perspectives in Public Administration, Lahore: Lion

Press, 1962.
Jahan, Rounaq, Pakistan: Failure in National Integration, New York:

Columbia University Press, 1972.
Jalal, Ayesha, The State of Martial Rule: The Origins of Pakistan’s

Political Economy of Defence, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1990.

Khan, Fazal Muqueem, The Story of the Pakistan Army, Karachi: Oxford
University Press, 1963.

Lamb, Alastair, Birth of a Tragedy, Kashmir 1947, Hertingfordbury:
Roxford, 1994.

Mahmood, Safdar, The Deliberate Debacle, London: Sh. Muhammad
Ashraf, 1976.



Years of War 129

Shah, Mehtab Ali, The Foreign Policy of Pakistan: Ethnic Impacts on
Diplomacy, London: I.B. Tauris, 1997.

Siddiqi, Aslam, Pakistan Seeks Security, Dacca: Longman, Green, 1960.
Zaheer, Hasan, The Times and Trial of the Rawalpindi Conspiracy, 1951:

The First Coup Attempt in Pakistan, Karachi: Oxford University Press,
1998.



5
REDEFINING PAKISTAN

The civil war in East Pakistan and India’s intervention dismem-
bered, humiliated, and humbled Pakistan. The country created by
Mohammad Ali Jinnah and his refugee based and inspired Muslim
League disappeared and was replaced by another that was yet to
be defined. The Pakistan that emerged from the ashes of defeat
was not a country guided by optimism, but one smarting from its
multiple wounds. Failure was writ large and there was enough
blame to include virtually every branch of government and every
sector of society. What remained of Pakistan was called to still
another test, one that required tracing its traditional and
mythological roots. Post-civil-war Pakistan needed recreating,
not from the legacy of Mohammad Ali Jinnah, but by those who
least supported the original independence movement. No longer a
refugee experience, Pakistan had to be configured to represent the
people of the northwestern quadrant of the South Asian peninsula.
The loss of East Bengal obviated the need for bridge building
between disparate communities, and centered attention on
constructing a Pakistan that was more akin to Islamist doctrine
and precept than that suggested by the constrained and tortured
secularism of the earlier vision. Moreover, the new Pakistan
required a different geopolitical orientation. No longer anchored
in South Asia, it was seen as attached to the Muslim world of the
Middle Eastern states.

130



Redefining Pakistan 131

Contests between nationalists and provincialists and between
secularists and Islamists had been won by, respectively, the
provincialists and the Islamists. The civil war put an end to the
notion that a Muslim-dominant country could be constructed
from a contemporary European formula and example. The vision
of the founding father, in the absence of the founding father, could
not be translated into operational programs that satisfied the
people who had been called to accept Pakistani identity. That
vision was from the outset challenged by a combination of local
and distant Islamist forces. These understood the alchemy
necessary for the legitimization of popular protest. The vision of
an integrative and balanced civil society, governed by sensitive and
selfless leaders, was shattered in the tragedy of Bangladesh. The
failure to sustain a semblance of union between West and East
Pakistan was read as the failure of a secularized Islam that
encouraged but did not succeed in tempering sectarian and ethnic
divisions within and between regions. Appeals to Islamic
brotherhood did not prevent the slaughter of the innocent in East
Bengal, and in fact the killing was intensified by distinctions made
between one representation of Islamic practice and another. Who
was the “better” Muslim, who was more worthy to be called a
Muslim, was as much at play in the Pakistan army assault on the
Bengali nation as was the effort to cleanse the region of its Hindu
population. The soldiers from Balochistan, Pashtunistan, and the
Punjab were convinced that their mission to kill Bengalis, of
whatever persuasion, was a call to preserve the faith, even if doing
so meant destroying Pakistan.

The gross inhumanity in East Pakistan was perpetrated by
essentially the same elements that transformed the long-standing
Kashmir dispute into a fetish of national identity. If the Kashmir
issue were important in the original Pakistan, the Muslim state
that emerged from the civil war and the nation’s dismemberment
would be even more tied to the Kashmir territory. East Bengalis,
after all, had little if any concern for Kashmir. In post-civil-war
Pakistan, however, Kashmir became the defining issue. Kashmir
became sacred land and Pakistan’s raison d’être was intertwined
with the jihad to liberate it from the Indian non-believers.
Pakistanis found in Kashmir, whether rationally or not, their
rallying ground, the reason that they needed to recreate still



132 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

another Pakistan. No Pakistani leader, present or future, was
allowed to ignore the significance of the Himalayan territory, and
especially its connection to Pakistan. All of Pakistan was made
hostage to the Kashmir conundrum. Thus East Pakistan, because it
represented a different ethos, could be erased from memory. The
old Pakistan was pictured giving way to a “real” Pakistan that had
risen phoenix-like from the debris of war, a war largely of its own
making but nevertheless attributed to its neighboring nemesis.

Give Yahya Khan credit for trying to build a political structure
that united the two wings of Pakistan, but also condemn him for
not following through on his grand design. Yahya was responsible
for the break-up of One Unit. But the reconstituting of the original
provinces of West Pakistan opened up old political wounds that
had hardly begun to heal, and re-established rivalries that could
not be reconciled. Give Yahya credit for acknowledging the need to
distribute representation in accordance with population numbers.
But again he bears responsibility for denying his own creation
when the national election results called for the East Pakistani
winners to form the government. Yahya decided to substitute the
parliamentary system for the much criticized presidential system,
but in the process lost control over events. Yahya set a course he
could not follow and the consequences of his political weakness
imposed upon the country a savage bloodletting that, paradoxi-
cally, could be stopped only by the country’s major enemy. Yahya’s
failure virtually ended whatever positive development Pakistan
had experienced in the previous two decades. At the end of
Yahya’s tenure, Pakistan was even more “moth-eaten” than at the
time of partition. Moreover, the proud Pakistan army, the
recipient of the greater portion of development resources, lay in
shambles, even more demoralized than the general population.

It would have been a proper time to rename Pakistan. It no
longer resembled its former self, nor did it stand for the same
values assumed at its creation in 1947. Transformed into a
congeries of provincial units that were held together under the
flimsiest of circumstances, the state was perpetuated by inertia not
purpose. If there was a time for dissolution it was at this juncture
in the history of the country. Sindhu Desh for the Sindhis,
Pashtunistan for the Pashtuns, Balochistan for the Balochi – all
had been common utterances in the different regions that sought



Redefining Pakistan 133

release from alleged Punjabi dominance. But this was not like the
break-up of the Soviet Union at the end of the cold war. This war,
had it been simply a civil war, might well have had that same
result. The Soviet Union dissolved because it no longer had a
recognizable major enemy; not so Pakistan. The role played by
India in bringing Pakistan to its knees was most important in
linking the new Pakistan to the older version.

Unable to adequately defend themselves from their neighbor,
the remaining provinces feigned unity in an effort to draw strength
from weakness. The northwestern region of the subcontinent was
of vital strategic interest to New Delhi, but India decided to
contain, not seize it. Akhand Bharat, the Hindu militant call for
absorbing Pakistan within India, would have to wait on another
day. Better to allow Pakistan to redefine its independence, for
the new Pakistan government to pick up the pieces and lead the
country into a relationship with India that now was not expected
to be different from those of Bangladesh, Nepal, and Bhutan.
Never more confident than after its military victory in 1971, New
Delhi anticipated a less aggressive and more submissive country
on India’s northwestern border. Bhutto was expected to shift
course away from Pakistan’s heavy dependence on military
posturing, to more diplomatic engagement.

Bhutto’s Pakistan: the external dimension

Bhutto was too close to the disaster that engulfed the former
Pakistan to understand the significance of the dismemberment.
Translating events in personal terms, he was compelled by his
blind ambition to read the situation as he saw it, that is, as a
conventional set of political circumstances that resulted in a
military crackdown, which ultimately provoked an act of Indian
aggression. It was all so simple. Bhutto bore no responsibility for
the conflict, whether civil or international. It is fascinating to see
the extent to which he, a bystander to events as they unfolded,
became the principal beneficiary of the great débâcle. Bhutto
refused to acknowledge his central position in the collapse of the
old Pakistan because he could not be both the old Pakistan’s
executioner and the new Pakistan’s singular benefactor. Bhutto’s
role as hero intertwined with his role as traitor, and few of his



134 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

compatriots this time, desperate for a savior, were prepared to
recognize this dual role. Thus the Pakistan army took the major
blow and Yahya’s resignation and the dissolution of the junta
opened the way for a civilian to reclaim leadership of Pakistan.
In the absence of genuine opposition, with the country in almost
total disarray, Bhutto’s oratory won the day. Bhutto formed the
first government of the new Pakistan, with himself the President of
the nation as well as its Chief Martial Law Administrator. Bhutto’s
legitimacy was supposedly rooted in the national elections of
1970. Bhutto called upon the citizenry to make the necessary
sacrifices, and the people of the new Pakistan answered his call,
much as they had answered the Quaid-i-Azam’s plea for selfless
devotion immediately after the 1947 partition.

It came as no surprise when Bhutto was acclaimed the “Quaid-i-
Awam,” the “Leader of the People.” The popular memory of
Jinnah as the founding father of the original Pakistan demanded
replication and Bhutto’s legitimacy appeared to hinge on the
connection between himself and the once great leader of the
Pakistani nation. The events that brought Bhutto to power,
however, were significantly different. Although both men achieved
their goals in the struggle with Hindu-dominant India, Bhutto’s
success was a consequence of the country’s worst defeat. But even
if Jinnah, in winning Pakistan, had bested India in the political
struggle with the colonial authority, Bhutto could nonetheless
attribute the twice-born Pakistan to a form of “liberation war.”
Unlike the first Pakistan, the second Pakistan was indeed a result
of armed action against a hated foe, even if the military campaign
was itself an abysmal failure. It must be remembered that Bhutto
declared Pakistan had been “saved” on his return to Karachi from
Dacca the day after the Pakistan army attacked the precincts of
Dacca University.

By a statesman-like act of compromise Bhutto could have
prevented the civil war. He chose not to do so, in large part
because he believed that, no matter the outcome of the conflict, he
and the nation were better served by the secession of East
Pakistan. Moreover, considerable informed opinion had reached
that same conclusion. But if it had already been decided to jettison
East Pakistan, why then the ferocious army assault on Mujib and
his Awami League, or indeed on the defenseless Bengali people?



Redefining Pakistan 135

The answer can only be found in the army’s perception of East
Bengal and the Bengalis. Trust and affection were in short supply
between the two wings of the country. Had there been a different
outlook, a different outcome might have been anticipated. Given
the power of the military junta, it would have been a gracious
action to call upon Mujib to form a government following the
Awami League’s enormous victory in the 1970 elections.
Graciousness could not be found in the junta’s dictionary. Nor
was it an attribute of the leader of the Pakistan People’s Party.

The army was ordered to humble the Bengalis and in the end it
only humbled itself. The war in East Pakistan, however,
demonstrated something even more compelling than the confused,
stunted, and devious thinking of the instigators of the civil war.
The original design of a single Muslim country with two distant
parts, separated from one another in everything save religion,
could not stand. East Pakistan, or East Bengal, the birthplace of
the Muslim League, could not make its presence known, let alone
respected, in the western wing of the country. After the defeat of
the Muslim League in the provincial East Bengal elections of 1954,
the secession of the east wing was only a matter of time. The
mishandling of the results of the 1970 elections revealed that that
time had come. Bhutto saw little of value in East Bengal. Shedding
it, in his thinking, would avoid numerous difficulties in power
sharing, resource sharing, and in defensive needs. Moreover, East
Bengal was too heavily influenced by Hindu culture. Pakistan
could never realize its potential as a Muslim country while
connected to East Bengal. Bhutto’s ambition was not only to
become the supreme leader of Pakistan; he also envisaged a role as
a great international figure and the major political personality in
the Islamic world. To construct the new Pakistan was the first task.
Building a strong, high profile nation from the calamity of a
devastating war would be judged a heavy responsibility in any
circumstances, but for Bhutto it was the stepping stone to still
higher status.

Knowing that the Pakistan armed forces had suffered substantial
losses, the new President placed himself in the center of the effort
to rebuild the military. At the same time he was prepared to take
advantage of the weakened army command to accrue more power
to his person. As Chief Martial Law Administrator he had



136 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

ultimate say over the uniformed soldiers, as he did over the general
population. The time also enabled him to emphasize the role of the
Pakistan People’s Party, which came under his strict command.
Declared the Chairman of the party, he saw his role as similar to
that held by Mao Zedong in China and Kim Il-Sung in North
Korea. Bhutto unabashedly clothed himself in the austere garb of
the pre-eminent Chinese leader, including the familiar Mao cap
and jacket. Bhutto was clear in his determination to reshape
Pakistan’s domestic and foreign policy, and his embrace of the
People’s Republic of China, as well as North Korea, was made in
public view. The Chinese and North Korean models of development
that called for mass mobilization intrigued him. He was convinced
the more sophisticated development strategies and theories of the
Western countries had little relevance for Pakistan. The people
required guidance and the country needed a disciplined population,
completely focused on and devoted to the tasks of nation building.

Demonstrating the need for distance from the United States,
Bhutto let it be known that Pakistan’s security, and its overall
interests, was better served by cooperative relationships with the
Communist states. It was Bhutto’s view that the confrontation that
Pakistan’s alliances with the United States had created served only
to undermine the country’s sovereignty and make it more
dependent on Washington. Washington’s actions during and
following the Indo-Pakistan War of 1965, and even the more
recent 1971 war, proved the dysfunction of the Western alliance
system. Arms shipments to Pakistan remained under embargo and
the country had been given little if any outside assistance to
warrant a continuation of alliance agreements. Moreover, with the
loss of East Pakistan, Bhutto justified the severing of ties to
SEATO. Not only was that alliance commitment a relic of the old
Pakistan, but the independence of Bangladesh had removed
Pakistan from the arena of Southeast Asian concerns. Pakistan
did not withdraw from CENTO. The Central Treaty Organization
represented the country’s association with the Muslim Middle East,
and the membership of Turkey and Iran in that alliance made such
a withdrawal inopportune. The same was not true for Pakistan’s
membership in the British Commonwealth of Nations. Bhutto
determined it was no longer in Pakistan’s interest to remain in the
Commonwealth – a reminder of the country’s former colonial



Redefining Pakistan 137

tutelage. Cutting ties to Britain was judged another demonstration
of the new Pakistan’s greater independence.

Confirming the new Pakistan had absolutely no intention of
reclaiming East Bengal, Bhutto ordered that Mujib be freed from
prison and the Bengali leader was permitted to return to
Bangladesh, where he became that country’s President. Although
Bhutto was not yet prepared to recognize the independence of
Bangladesh, his gesture was aimed at India, with which he sought
improved relations. Moreover, Bhutto was under pressure from
the army to gain the release of the ninety-three thousand Pakistani
soldiers held as prisoners of war in Bangladesh and India. Much
talk had circulated in Bengal about the trial of soldier war
criminals who were implicated in the commission of atrocities
during the civil war. Such trials were better avoided and the new
Pakistani leader indicated a willingness to discuss outstanding
issues with his Indian counterparts in an effort to prevent the
trials. In April 1972 Bhutto lifted martial law and promulgated an
interim constitution that suggested an attempt to return the
country to normalcy. Differences between Bhutto and Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi seemed to delay their agreeing to a face-to-
face meeting. Bhutto nevertheless pressed Indira to accept his
entreaties and to almost everyone’s surprise the Indian government
announced a meeting had been arranged for June in the hill station
at Simla. Gone was the vitriol when the Pakistani public received
the news. Anti-Indian rhetoric virtually disappeared when Bhutto
journeyed to India. Unlike the public outcry when Ayub went to
Tashkent, Bhutto was urged on by a tide of well wishers. Thus,
Bhutto and Indira, without third party involvement, struck a deal
in a short time and without rancor. India agreed to pull its forces
from territory occupied during the 1971 war. The two sides also
agreed to a new line of control in Kashmir. In return for Indian
recognition of Pakistan’s domination of Azad Kashmir, Pakistan
did not question India’s control of the Vale of Kashmir.

The Simla agreement was also important for what it did not
include. No mention was made of the long-disputed plebiscite in
Kashmir, and some observers concluded that Pakistan had finally
agreed to accept permanent Indian occupation of the Muslim-
dominant Vale. Of more immediate concern was Bhutto’s
apparent failure to gain the release of the ninety-three thousand



138 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

prisoners of war languishing in Indian and Bangladeshi prison
camps. Moreover, the matter of show trials of Pakistani troops
remained a major interest. Under criticism when he returned to
Pakistan, Bhutto called for patience and insisted he had not sold
out the country or its armed forces. All the same, he faced the first
serious opposition since taking up the reins of Pakistan government.
Bhutto called for calm and a more realistic understanding of the
parameters of his discussions with Indira and argued the need to
provide time for the armed forces to rebuild their units. He
declared he had reiterated Pakistan’s support for Kashmiri self-
determination and that that quest would be raised again when the
country was better prepared to press its claim in international
forums. What was important, he cautioned, was a calculated
response to Indian aggressiveness which enabled Pakistan to avoid
falling within India’s sphere of influence. As Stanley Wolpert
reported, Bhutto’s opposition melted before the fire of his
oratorical eloquence.

Bhutto’s diplomatic skills were highlighted in his relations with
India, but the Islamic Summit Conference he initiated in 1974
brought him even more plaudits. Convened in Lahore, the meeting
drew together Muslim rulers and governors from all over the
Islamic world. In attendance was King Faisal of Saudi Arabia,
Anwar al-Sadat of Egypt, Hafiz al-Assad of Syria, Muammar
Qaddafi of Libya, Yasser Arafat representing the Palestinians, and
others. Prominent for his absence was the Shah of Iran, whom
Bhutto had intimate relations with but nevertheless could not
convince to attend. Bhutto also used the occasion of the Summit to
announce Pakistan’s official recognition of Bangladesh and had
Mujibur Rahman appear at the meeting. The apparent rapproche-
ment with Mujib enabled Bhutto to press the Bengali leader to
release the prisoners of war and to forgo the trials of those troops
accused of war crimes. Mujib complied with this request, and,
with Indian assistance gained earlier, the soldiers were released
and returned to Pakistan. Perhaps because he did not want to
undermine his improved relations with the Indian government,
Bhutto did not mention the Kashmir dispute at the Summit.
Instead, he reserved his attack for the Israelis, who, he noted, had
refused to return captured Arab lands to their original owners.
Pakistan’s solidarity with the Palestinians became a central feature



Redefining Pakistan 139

of Bhutto’s foreign policy, not only because it was a burning issue
in the Arab states, but because the Muslim nations had shown
virtually no interest in the Kashmir dispute. Given his wider
ambitions, Bhutto worked at reinforcing his new relationship with
India while developing greater intimacy with the Arab leaders.

Bhutto’s Pakistan: the internal dimension

Despite being hailed Pakistan’s new savior, Bhutto confronted
serious challenges to his rule. In fact his general success in
moderating the country’s foreign policy ushered domestic questions
to centre stage. Bhutto’s Sindhi identity was seen to offer carte
blanche to local Sindhis to resume their movement against
the province’s refugee or “mohajir” community. Asserting the
mohajirs had monopolized the economic life of the nation and
hence had intensified the poverty of the native population, Sindhi
nationalists precipitated riots in Karachi and Hyderabad. The
rioters targeted those Pakistanis who had fled India during the
partition, or their progeny, who were still not accepted as Sindhis.
Adding to refugee numbers were the more recent immigrants from
Bangladesh. Karachi, Pakistan’s commercial and financial capital,
had been a small seaport before independence. Transformed by the
mohajirs, its prosperity was a consequence of their business acumen
and dynamism. Native Sindhis, however, were not impressed, in
large part because they failed to reap the benefits of the city’s
expanding capitalism. They declared the mohajirs exploiters,
moreover, their attacks on the immigrant community were costly
in lives and property and required a firm government response.

Before he assumed power, Bhutto’s political antics contributed
to the rising tension between these communities. His exploitation
of anti-refugee sentiment was aimed at winning native Sindhi
support for his Pakistan People’s Party, but his rhetoric was
explosive and the impact extended beyond his political needs. It
was Bhutto who revitalized provincial leaders like G.M. Syed, the
venerable Sindhi extremist, who had long pressed for an
independent Sindhu Desh. Once in power, Bhutto remained the
stalwart Sindhi nationalist. He echoed and seemed to support
the attack on mohajir culture. He also added fuel to the fire that
the Sindhi separatists had set in decrying the dominance of the



140 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Urdu language. Speaking on the subject of the new Pakistan,
Bhutto implied that Urdu had become the national language in the
old and now defunct Pakistan only because of the heavy influence
of the refugee community. According to Bhutto, the new Pakistan
was formed from more indigenous circumstances and it did not
need to cater to distant connections. More immediate concerns
were with the provinces, and Bhutto was not one to neglect their
individual identity. He no longer saw Urdu as a critical unifier. The
mohajirs, however, still believing they were the genuine Pakistanis,
took issue with Bhutto and questioned his Pakistani bona fides in a
series of public demonstrations.

At the Lahore Islamic Summit Bhutto had addressed the need
for Islamic unity; nevertheless he was disinclined to promote unity
at home. The country’s divisive and competitive ethnic structure
provided ample opportunity for a demagogue, always seeking
personal political advantage, to divide one group against the other.
Bhutto was reluctant to permit more Bangladesh mohajirs
(Biharis) to enter the country. He also encouraged those insisting
on making the Sindhi language the official language of the
province. Described as the “Raja of Larkana” (Larkana was his
ancestral home), Bhutto was accused of a divide and rule policy
that reminded many of the colonial era. The riots that welled up
and inundated the cities and hinterland of Sindh were to burden
the Bhutto administration from this time forward. Moreover,
Chairman Bhutto’s divisive policies could not be contained.

Bhutto’s strategy was aimed at breaking the back of all current
and potential resistance. His only real opposition in Sindh was
from the mohajir population, which had been closely identified
with the Muslim League. The collapse of that party, however, did
not cause the refugee community to embrace the Pakistan People’s
Party. Hence Bhutto’s attempt to bypass them by exciting the
sensibilities of the native Sindhis. The counterproductive nature of
this exercise soon led to the creation of a mohajir political party
that initially was called the Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM).
Finding it necessary to fight for their freedom in yet another vista,
the MQM came to dominate the politics of Karachi.

Bhutto also took issue with the main political powers in the
North West Frontier Province and Balochistan: the National
Awami Party led by Wali Khan, the son of Ghaffar Khan, and



Redefining Pakistan 141

Mufti Mahmood’s Jamiatul-Ulema-i-Islam. The PPP entered into a
tripartite pact with these organizations, but Bhutto betrayed their
agreement and removed the parties as a threat to national security.
Wali Khan’s claim that Bhutto intended to have him murdered
increased the tension. Warned not to enter the frontier provinces,
and generally concerned about his personal safety, Bhutto ordered
the formation of the Federal Security Force (FSF), a paramilitary
organization principally made up of former army personnel and
acknowledged criminal elements. Among the leaders of the FSF
was Akbar Khan, the accused leader of the Rawalpindi
Conspiracy and now a close associate of the President. The FSF,
and the PPP People’s Guards, likewise an aggressive assemblage,
assumed responsibility for protecting Bhutto as he traveled the
country. The FSF also was given the task of isolating and, if
necessary, arresting anyone believed to be plotting attacks on the
head of state or senior members of his government. With the
passage of time the FSF became the central instrument of domestic
political violence. Its growing power, its reputation as an
intimidating force, and its delegated but nonetheless arbitrary
use of violence against defenseless citizens struck fear in the
population and also raised serious questions in the Pakistan army.

Bhutto failed to sustain the confidence of the Pakistani nation.
His resort to extreme measures, as well as his use of questionable
tactics, embittered wide sectors of the polity. Such was the case in
Balochistan only a year after the PPP takeover. The provincial
government of Balochistan challenged Islamabad’s intrusive
methods. Asserting that the Balochistan provincial government
was threatened by PPP directives and actions, local Balochi
leaders insisted on reclaiming their traditional autonomy. Since
Balochistan’s declaration as a province shortly after partition, its
tribal orders continued to dominate the political life of the region.
Sardars, or local headmen, were the identifiable rulers of the
different areas. Their constituents were guided by tribal practices
and knew little about the more sophisticated methods of
governance. Moreover, the Sardars resented PPP policies that
blatantly endeavored to steal their power and destroy the historic
tribal order. Bhutto refused to acknowledge the tribal tradition
and was concerned only with bringing the province under PPP
control. His order to the FSF to remove the provincial government



142 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

met with stiff resistance. The Sardars interpreted the action as a
declaration of war. They ordered the mobilization of the tribesmen
and called them to do battle with the agents of the PPP. Bhutto was
not one to negotiate a settlement with people he considered
inferior, and thus, in January 1973, he ordered regular army units
into Balochistan. Recalling Ayub’s success in quickly crushing the
Khan of Kalat, Bhutto directed the Pakistan army to center their
actions in the Lasbela region. The Balochi resistance fighters were
described as “miscreants” by the central government, the same
term used to describe the Bengalis. As they clashed with the army,
memories of the recent civil war in East Bengal could not be
avoided.

Although the struggle in Balochistan did not receive the
attention of the outside world, it was nevertheless another
Pakistani civil war, and another one that Bhutto had provoked.
Balochistan’s arid terrain, its relatively sparse population, and its
remote geographic setting circumscribed a conflict of different
dimensions from that of East Bengal. Still, it was the second civil
insurrection to erupt in Pakistan within a period of five years, and
both tragedies could be traced to the behavior and ambition of
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. General Tikka Khan, who had gained his
reputation as the “Butcher of Bengal,” was again called to lead a
Pakistan army against its own citizens. Tikka said the army had
been ordered to put down an insurgency. Pakistan’s more attentive
public was stunned by the action. How many more Pakistanis
were to be dubbed miscreants and, worse still, traitors? How
many more were to be considered secessionists when they stood in
opposition to policies that denied them their character and
identity, let alone their freedom? Bhutto ignored such questions
and justified his actions by declaring Pakistan was at war with
nefarious forces. He cited the Baloch Liberation Front as a
principal source of concern. He also alluded to collusion between
the Balochi governor, Mir Ghaus Bakhsh Khan Bizenjo, and Abdul
Ghaffar Khan, who had returned from self-imposed exile in India
and Afghanistan to receive a hero’s welcome in Peshawar. The two
outspoken leaders of their respective provinces were perceived as
forming a Pashtun–Balochi alliance, with assistance provided by
Kabul, New Delhi, and their superpower mentor, the Soviet
Union.



Redefining Pakistan 143

Bhutto therefore ordered Bizenjo removed. He installed as
governor Bizenjo’s principal rival, Nawab Akbar Bugti. The
Balochi Chief Minister was also sacked, as was the governor of
the North West Frontier Province. Thus ended the earlier
agreement between the PPP and the ruling parties on the frontier.
When high-ranking officers in the Pakistan army began to question
Bhutto’s aggressive policies, the PPP Chairman accused them of
“Bonapartist” behavior and dismissed the high command. General
Tikka Khan was Bhutto’s choice to take charge of the Pakistan
army. Bhutto claimed his decisions centered on the need to establish
a democratic political system in the country, to unify its people, and
to stimulate the development process. Wali Khan noted at the time
that the real objective of the President was absolute power and the
construction of a fascist state. It was Wali Khan who addressed the
PPP leader as “Adolf Bhutto.” The war in Balochistan revealed little
had been learned from the civil war in East Pakistan. It also
demonstrated that the new Pakistan was no more secure, no more
integrated, no more stable than the older version.

Pakistan suffered from a lack of national organizations as well
as a paucity of national leaders. Although the Islamic religion
offered a hint of unity, it was insufficient to bridge differences that
were both cultural and historic. When the United Democratic
Front was organized to combine Wali Khan’s National Awami
Party with the Sindhi Pir of Pagaro’s Muslim League and Maulana
Maudoodi’s Jamaat-i-Islami, it proved more a desperate attempt to
challenge Bhutto’s power than a serious effort in promoting
political integration. Bhutto ordered his Federal Security Force to
neutralize the UDF. Whether he used the FSF or the Pakistan army,
Bhutto’s response to anyone opposing his rule was their forcible
destruction. Nevertheless, Bhutto continued to emphasize the
righteousness of his actions. He continued to insist that his purpose
was to eliminate the enemies of Pakistan, who, he insisted, were
also the enemies of democracy.

In spite of the sustained turmoil, on April 12, 1973 Bhutto
presented a constitution to the new Pakistan. Although Bhutto was
more inclined toward a presidential model, the new constitution
was parliamentary in form and organization. Insuring that the
President would be a purely ceremonial figure, Bhutto assumed the
role of Prime Minister. The constitution also described a state



144 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

focused on Islamic precept and practice. Article 227 noted that all
laws must conform with the injunctions of Islam as laid down in
the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah. No law would be permitted that
was repugnant to injunctions of Islam. An Islamic Council was
incorporated in the constitution but the wording of the document
left important questions unanswered about its power vis-à-vis the
National Assembly and provincial legislatures. There was no
ambiguity, however, on the matter of the President being a
Muslim, or whether Pakistan would endeavor to preserve and
strengthen fraternal relations with Muslim countries based upon
the need for Muslim unity. Article 1 described Pakistan as an
“Islamic Republic,” and Islam was established as the state religion
in Article 2. The constitution, however, did nothing to limit the
power of the PPP Chairman. In fact extraordinary powers were
conferred upon the Prime Minister which reduced the National
Assembly to a submissive agency operating at the will of the
supreme leader. Justification for this executive-dominant form of
parliamentary government was attributed to the country’s
sustained instability. The country required a firm hand at the
helm, it was said, and the unusual times demanded a decision-
making process that was both direct and enforceable.

Wali Khan addressed the concerns of the opposition when he
stated the Chairman had been placed above reproach and that
public scrutiny had been made impossible. The PPP majority had
made the constitution possible and those contesting the excesses of
the administration were left with the awareness that only in the
streets could they demonstrate their distress and disfavor. Thus
was created the “Imperial Prime Minister.” Bhutto intended to
rule Pakistan indefinitely. The constitution gave him an initial six
years and, given the government’s capacity to dominate its foes, no
doubt another five could be projected. After that it was anyone’s
guess whether the Quaid-i-Awam would be prepared to step aside,
or whether, instead, he would seek a life term. Bhutto needed a
constitution not to limit the powers of the executive, but rather to
enhance and ensure his paramountcy in the context of the
country’s viceregal tradition. In the absence of an effective
opposition and protected by several layers of security, Bhutto
seemed untouchable, his power as dictatorial as could be imagined
in the South Asian milieu.



Redefining Pakistan 145

During this period word reached Islamabad that King Zahir
Shah had been forced from his throne in Afghanistan by his cousin
Sardar Daud. The Afghan monarchy was declared terminated and
a Republic was created under Daud’s leadership. With the
Pakistan army continuing to operate in Balochistan and with the
war spreading into portions of the North West Frontier Province,
Bhutto felt it important to quickly recognize the new regime and
to begin a process of normalizing relations. Cognizant that Daud
was a principal author of Afghanistan’s “Pushtunistan policy,”
Bhutto had every intention of cementing ties with the one country
in a position to assist the tribal insurrection. Afghanistan was also
the first Muslim country to represent a threat to Pakistan when it
was established in 1947. With Daud’s assurance of cooperation
and with Bhutto’s promise of material assistance, the Afghan
President was expected to deny sanctuary and aid to the
insurgents, thus making it possible for Pakistan to bring the
Balochistan fighting to a conclusion. Bhutto therefore extended his
hand to Daud and promised brotherly relations between their two
governments. Given his own internal problems, Daud commu-
nicated his desire to accept Bhutto’s entreaty. Both leaders
concluded it was in their mutual interest to bring the hostilities
on their border to a close.

The fall of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto

Bhutto’s deftness in handling foreign issues, however, was in stark
contrast to his domestic behavior. Suspicious of anyone who might
question his authority, not least those immediately around him,
even the very people who had supported his rise to power, after his
initial year in office he concluded he no longer needed or wanted
their counsel. The marriage of political personalities that
organized the PPP proved to be more convenient than permanent.
Little affection passed among the principals. J.A. Rahim,
Mubashir Hasan, Mairaj Mohammad Khan, Mukhtar Rana,
Ahmad Raza Kasuri, for all their revolutionary expression, were
men of integrity and deep learning. Doctrinaire socialists, their
goal was a more compassionate Pakistan that reflected the simple
instincts of the majority population, catered to basic popular
needs, and gave substance to ideals of social improvement. None



146 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

of them coveted personal power. Bhutto was their choice because
he was already a celebrated leader with a fine education and an
extraordinary gift of oratory. Bhutto, they also believed, was a
young man who in their judgment not only reflected their
sentiments, but was open to guidance and collective decision
making.

The PPP leaders proved to be right in the former expectation but
so wrong in the latter. Whatever the explanation, these colleagues
of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto failed or refused to see the man’s driving,
even irrational, ambition, or the mental flaw that distorted his
vision. And though they knew something of his aristocratic
breeding, they did not grasp the mindset of this Sindhi member of
the wadera or land-holding class of Sindh province. Bhutto, for all
his Western education, for all his protestations about democracy,
would never be able to transcend his autocratic attitude. He did
not have the personal qualities needed to transform himself into a
genuine man of the people. Bhutto was predetermined by
upbringing and temperament to be a domineering manager of
people, never their true representative.

Cracks in the PPP leadership opened early in the Bhutto
administration. Mukhtar Rana and Mairaj Mohammad Khan
were too outspoken for Bhutto’s taste and when they questioned
his grab for total power, he had them arrested and jailed without
formal charges being brought against them. Bhutto ceased being
open to collegial advice, let alone opposition. He displayed little
patience with those who hesitated in carrying through his orders,
and, though sometimes prepared to hear the views of others, he let
it be known he preferred his own guidance. Bhutto’s inner circle
was not pleased with the formation of the Federal Security Force
and they were even more disturbed when its personnel were drawn
from the darker side of society. Aware that the FSF could be used
against them as well as the official opposition, they were mindful
that any action or statement on their part could bring the
organization to their door. The FSF by this time was linked with a
series of political murders. Its operatives were also unleashed to
seize the property of targeted individuals, to maintain close watch
over the activities of those deemed unfriendly to the regime, to bug
telephone lines, and to pressure and intimidate members of the
media. Bhutto’s colleagues had not envisaged the building of a



Redefining Pakistan 147

police state but they were helpless to reverse course once the
President’s coercive system was in place.

By July 1974, Bhutto had spread his political influence into
every sector of society. No institution resisted his intrusion. He
had weakened the army with the civil war in East Bengal, and now
further by bogging it down in a tribal war on the frontier. He had
destroyed an elite bureaucracy, in place since colonial times, and
had politicized its officers. He had opened the ranks of the PPP to
include landlords and industrialists who otherwise would be
threatened with seizures of their property. He had nationalized
many of the country’s key industrial units and there were
indications that other private holdings were targeted. Though he
still insisted he was the people’s leader, his offer of shelter, bread,
and clothing to the poor remained more a slogan than a reality,
but Bhutto nonetheless retained the charismatic qualities that
sustained the people’s interest. Bhutto had little to fear from the
poor and undereducated. It was the informed opposition that he
feared and his attention was centered on limiting their actions.

No one within the inner circle of the PPP was more important
than J.A. Rahim, the true founder of the Pakistan People’s Party.
Much Bhutto’s senior, the elderly Rahim had believed he could
mold and shape Bhutto to play the role he believed destiny had
ordained. However, Rahim had begun to have serious doubts
during the débâcle in East Pakistan. It was Rahim who tried to
save the country from the tragedy of civil war and dismemberment.
It was he who negotiated a compromise solution with members of
the Awami League, only to have it rejected by Bhutto. Events were
again in the saddle and the emergence of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto as
Pakistan’s savior could not be prevented once the Pakistan army
had surrendered to Indian forces. After the transfer of power to
Bhutto, Rahim tried to advise and influence Bhutto on the need
to transform Pakistan into a quasi-socialist welfare state. The
nationalization of major industries and utilities soon after the PPP
takeover was attributed to Rahim. But Rahim knew then that it
was too late to truly influence the Chairman’s thinking or
methods.

Bhutto had used Rahim as he had the other leaders of the PPP.
They had enabled him to distance himself from the traditional
political organizations, and they had helped to set Bhutto’s sight



148 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

on the construction of the only true national political organization
in Pakistan. But given Pakistan’s condition after the 1971 war with
India there was no way anyone could have influenced Bhutto
to take actions he believed did not serve his personal interest.
And although in the early months following his assumption of
the presidency a degree of collegiality was maintained, once the
weight of governing Pakistan taxed his energy Bhutto no longer
suffered the assistance of others, not even those closest to him.
Thus by 1974 Rahim and Bhutto came to a parting of the ways.
The event precipitating the separation was Bhutto’s decision to
choose a Minister of Defense and Foreign Affairs. During a
cabinet meeting, Rahim opposed the selection. Heated words were
exchanged and Bhutto ordered the older man to leave the room.
That night members of the FSF invaded Rahim’s residence and
informed him that he had been dismissed from the cabinet and
that his office as Secretary General of the PPP would be taken from
him. When Rahim’s son appeared to defend his father, a scuffle
broke out in which the PPP elder statesman was beaten and
suffered severe injury. The Pakistan People’s Party was never the
same following that incident. Mustafa Khar, Hanif Ramay,
Mubashir Hasan, Khurshid Hassan Meer, all celebrated founders
and leaders of the PPP, left the party, but not before many of them
had been arrested, imprisoned, or forced into exile.

The PPP at its inception was a political organization different
from all others in Pakistan’s experience. It was nurtured by men
indigenous to the country, professional in calling, and urbane in
temperament, but it was not democratically organized or led.
Leftist-thinking philosophy permeated the senior leaders, and all
assumed positions in opposition to landed feudalism, religious
fanaticism, ethnic divisiveness, and the overbearing bureaucratism
that had dominated Pakistani politics. Although Bhutto’s aristo-
cratic background should have eliminated his prospects for
leadership of the PPP, he was the only recognized political
luminary with the necessary gifts and disposition to put the
organization seriously into play. The PPP’s original Manifesto
described an intention to make the new Pakistan a model polity
and home for a polyglot society that found harmony in
cooperative endeavor and progressive programs. As a consequence,
and with Bhutto’s high profile, the PPP drew support from



Redefining Pakistan 149

students, factory workers, sharecroppers, as well as the intelli-
gentsia and professional fraternities. When he received the transfer
of power from Yahya in December 1971, Bhutto could legitimately
claim that he had come to power with the largest support base
since 1947, the year Mohammad Ali Jinnah became the Governor
General of Pakistan. With such a successful coalition, and with no
less a mandate than that enjoyed by Jinnah, how did Bhutto
manage to antagonize so many so soon? The answer to that
question lies somewhere in the character of the man, in his
essential insecurity and his overwhelming paranoia.

Bhutto’s overbearing posture, his use of arbitrary power, and his
assault on anyone judged to be his enemy caused disaffection in
the ranks of the faithful as well as among his more intimate
colleagues. The FSF had become a self-motivating operation and
its aggressiveness and repressive acts won few friends for the PPP
leader. Murder, torture, false imprisonment, and the forceful
seizure of private property were some of the more notable
concerns of the Pakistani public. Bhutto, however, neither altered
his behavior nor reined in his storm troops. Moved to voice their
grievances, the student population began to reconsider their
loyalty to the Chairman, and when altercations erupted in the
country’s universities and colleges, the force used to suppress the
disorder only added to the intensity of the protest. With his inner
circle challenging his authority and the student community
engaging in protests, the PPP began to split into factions.
Difficulties in the Punjab, the most important of the Pakistani
provinces, resulted in Bhutto’s sacking of successive PPP provincial
governments but that too did nothing to reverse the decay. Bhutto
ordered that the PPP Manifesto be redrafted but that was an
exercise not likely to stymie the disaffection. Bhutto looked to the
religious orders and the Islamists for support, but they struck a
hard bargain. From weakness not strength Bhutto had joined the
Islamist front organizations that called for renewed assaults on the
Ahmediyya community, a painful reminder of the Punjab riots of
1953. Long the target of the fundamentalists, the Ahmediyya were
again declared a scourge on Islam. They held high positions in the
armed services as well as in government, and it had long been the
Islamists’ objective to destroy Ahmediyya influence in the country.
The Ayub and Yahya governments had repulsed such efforts. The



150 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

PPP Chairman, however, was in need of a new alliance and the
Islamist orders appeared to provide him with an important base.
The Ahmediyya therefore were an available scapegoat.

Bhutto brought legislation before the National Assembly declar-
ing the Ahmediyya to be non-Muslims. The legislation also
prevented the sect from observing Islamic rituals. Minaret towers
that distinguished mosques from other buildings, as well as the call
to Muslims to join in common prayer, were disallowed the
Ahmediyya by law. Declared to be heretics, the Ahmediyya were
ordered to be removed from all positions of public office or service
in the armed forces. Bhutto’s support for these restrictions on
Pakistani citizens won the Chairman the plaudits of the most
extreme fundamentalists, but it caused deeper divisions within his
party, played havoc with the notion of civil society, and raised
serious questions about democratic governance. Bhutto revealed he
was more the autocrat and an opportunist, not the democrat he
would have others believe. Moreover, given Bhutto’s alliance with
the landed gentry and the country’s capitalist class, the new PPP
Manifesto said little about the vision of a united Pakistan and much
about the feverish effort to shore up Bhutto’s sagging authority.
Bhutto had not only been a principal in the dismemberment of the
country, he was a promoter of divisiveness and domestic violence,
and the central figure in the fragmentation of the Pakistan People’s
Party. Bhutto was the paramount contradiction. Everything he did,
he argued, was in the best interest of his country and its people. The
record reveals that everything he did was for personal gain, no
matter the cost to the country. Bhutto’s philosophy seemed to
suggest the country had to be destroyed in order to be saved. Bhutto
was Pakistan, and, according to such logic, what was good for
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was also good for the country.

Bhutto had generated his own enemies. Wali Khan had become
the central voice of the opposition and it was he who accused
Bhutto of perpetuating and deepening a state of terror in the
country. The Balochistan civil war had caused thousands of
casualties. Only the brute force of the Pakistan army had forced
the Balochi tribesmen to retreat and find refuge in the mountains
between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Bhutto accused Wali Khan of
treason, of consorting with New Delhi and Kabul, and he tried to
intimidate him by directing the FSF to shadow his moves. Again,



Redefining Pakistan 151

the NAP leader declared Bhutto was trying to kill him. Were it not
for Wali Khan’s loyal supporters and vigilant bodyguard the FSF
might have succeeded in doing so. There were other targets,
however, and in November 1974 Ahmad Raza Kasuri, an old PPP
stalwart and former member of the inner circle around Bhutto,
was returning to his residence when automatic gunfire riddled his
vehicle with bullets. Kasuri survived the incident but his father
died amid the hail of projectiles. Kasuri stormed into the National
Assembly bearing his father’s bloody shirt and pointed to Zulfikar
Ali Bhutto as the person who had ordered the attack. Bhutto
denied complicity in the assault and declared his enemies were
trying to destroy him through false accusations. The killing,
however, illustrated the roiling violence loose in the country, so
much of it aided and abetted by the Bhutto government.

In February 1975 an explosive device planted under a lectern at
Peshawar University killed a prominent PPP frontier leader and
special confidant of Chairman Bhutto. Bhutto cut short a trip
abroad and returned to Pakistan to order the arrest of Wali Khan.
He also ordered the dissolution of Wali Khan’s National Awami
Party and seized the party’s assets. In the absence of the National
Assembly’s opposition leader, the United Democratic Front
declared it would boycott assembly deliberations and immediately
ordered its followers into the streets to protest the arbitrary
actions of the administration. The PPP had never been a strong
party in either the NWFP or Balochistan and in the circumstances
there was little likelihood of the party improving its standings.
Moreover, Bhutto was under pressure to hold elections that were
believed necessary to reinforce his authority. He continued to
function as Pakistan’s supreme ruler as a consequence of the pre-
civil-war elections, and it was generally believed the Chairman
required a new mandate, one more representative of the new
Pakistan. Bhutto’s reluctance to stand for election during a period
of instability and disaffection was obvious, but so too was his need
for a demonstration of political legitimacy.

That opportunity came from an unexpected source. India
detonated a nuclear device in 1974 that sent shock waves
throughout the world. The impact on Pakistan, however, was
extreme. Bhutto’s oratorical skills were made for such occasions
and he sought to reassure his compatriots that Pakistan would not



152 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

be idle in meeting this new Indian challenge. Publicly condemning
the action, Bhutto argued that Pakistan had no alternative but to
launch an effort that would provide the country with a similar
capability. Bhutto emotionally addressed the need for an “Islamic
bomb” in so far as the Communists had their bombs, Christian
nations had theirs, and now the Hindus as well. The reception in
Pakistan to Bhutto’s statement was immediate and overwhelmingly
favorable. Envisaging such a capability a deterrent to Indian
nuclear blackmail, Pakistanis in all walks of life approved of the
idea and believed it would make their country more secure. Bhutto
also saw atomic weapons as ensuring Pakistan’s leadership in the
Muslim world. Pakistanis were divided on virtually every issue,
save the matter of Pakistan acquiring nuclear weapons. How far
the “Islamic bomb” issue enabled Bhutto to restore some of his
lost prestige is difficult to estimate, but it certainly provided a
boost to his fortunes. On the other hand, there was a greater
degree of fatalism in Bhutto’s speeches and pronouncements after
the Indian test. Not that he felt Pakistan was in imminent danger,
but his state of mind had been deeply impacted. By nature he was
a brooding personality, and his sense of foreboding was
heightened in 1975 when word reached Islamabad that Mujibur
Rahman had been gunned down with most of his extended family
by disgruntled members of Bangladesh’s armed forces. On another
front, the state of emergency imposed by Indira Gandhi also raised
questions about the durability of governments, no matter how
charismatic.

In an effort to boost his dwindling support Bhutto issued a
decree calling for land reform which aimed at assisting the small
land-holder. Earlier reforms had permitted the holding of 150 acres
of irrigated land and three hundred acres of non-irrigated land.
The earlier reforms applied to individuals, not families, however,
and there had been little change in the poverty of rural folk. These
reforms attempted to improve their circumstances. They were also
expected to bring more people into the PPP camp. Bhutto
therefore launched still other reforms that would give more
tangible meaning to the PPP battle cry of “Bread, Clothing, and
Shelter.” Bhutto attempted to reclaim a reputation for assisting the
needy and his movements were orchestrated to receive maximum
attention from the Pakistani masses. Public functions involved



Redefining Pakistan 153

sporting events and gymnastic competitions arranged with
assistance from the North Koreans and Chinese. In 1976,
Mohammad Ali Jinnah’s one-hundredth birth anniversary was
an occasion for year-long celebrations, culminating with the
Quaid’s birthday in December. 1976 also was the year General
Tikka Khan’s tenure as commander of the Pakistani army ended.
The war in Balochistan began to lose its intensity. It seemed an
appropriate time to consider holding national elections and plans
moved forward to allow the Pakistani people to register their faith
in the administration.

In the meantime, a replacement had to be found to lead the
Pakistan army. Bhutto selected General Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, a
lesser-known officer who had served in Jordan on special
assignment during the civil war. Zia came to the Prime Minister’s
attention because he was a devout Muslim, had no connection to
Bhutto’s past, and was not considered personally ambitious. Zia
was expected not to disturb the relationship between the
government and the army and to demonstrate perfect loyalty to
the constitution and the Prime Minister. With the American
ambassador, Henry Byroade, pressuring Washington to lift the
arms embargo imposed on Pakistan more than ten years before,
there was some expectation that the Pakistan army would be put
through another modernization program and Zia was considered
the general best able to manage the job. The Pakistan army also
was given responsibility for Pakistan’s nuclear weapons program,
and Bhutto envisaged a close relationship between Zia and himself
on matters pertaining to the assembly of scientific personnel as
well as the procurement of the required materials. Finally, Bhutto
wanted a man at the helm of the army who would maintain its
political neutrality, especially with elections being projected for
1977. With most of the leading politicians in prison or denied
participation in politics, Bhutto intended using the FSF to
maintain domestic security upon their release. He wanted
assurances the army would not interfere with FSF policing
responsibilities and in effect would confine its activities to external
defense. In Zia, Bhutto believed he had found the general to meet
his needs.

However, Bhutto’s expectations and the reality within the army
were not the same. By the mid-1970s the officers who had been



154 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

intimate with Bhutto had all retired. The new retinue of colonels
and generals were not personally connected to the Prime Minister.
Moreover, as veterans of the 1965 and 1971 wars these officers
had developed a different perception of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.
Unlike their predecessors, they were not in awe of Bhutto’s
reputed brilliance or his rhetoric. Many officers had family
members who had suffered losses of property in run-ins with the
PPP and FSF, or had reason to question Bhutto’s governing style.
Some officers therefore harbored grievances with either the PPP
administration or Bhutto himself. Still others saw Ayub and Yahya
as good soldiers, who were somehow caused to suffer disgrace in
circumstances not entirely of their making. Little of this surfaced,
however, at the time Zia was sworn in as army commander.

Bhutto’s political legitimacy now appeared to hinge more on his
Islamic bona fides, which were never judged to be strong. Not a
religious Muslim, Bhutto played at religion more than he practiced
it. Nevertheless, he could not ignore the country’s tendency to
express itself along spiritual lines. Therefore, Bhutto made the
most of the International Seerat Congress that celebrated and
memorialized the life of the Prophet. Speaking at the meeting,
Bhutto tried to connect his foreign policy with the Prophet’s
teachings. Citing his work in promoting Islamic solidarity, he
portrayed Islam as the defining civilization in world history.
Bhutto also used the occasion to invite the Shah of Iran and his
Empress to make an appearance at the Congress. Bhutto recalled
that the Shah had declined his invitation to attend the Lahore
Islamic Summit because of differences with some of the
participants. This gesture was an effort to bridge that circumstance.
It was also an opportunity for Bhutto to express his gratitude to
the Shah for the assistance Iran had provided Pakistan, especially
in the management of petroleum needs during a period of
escalating prices. Bhutto discussed Pakistan’s effort to develop
alternative sources of energy, particularly nuclear power. He also
expressed his concern about India’s nuclear program that had now
demonstrated weapons grade capacities.

No one could forecast how the Shah’s and Bhutto’s personal
destinies were intertwined, but it was clear from their meeting that
the Pakistani Prime Minister had modeled much of his regime on
that of the Shah’s and that the two men were intimately tied to one



Redefining Pakistan 155

another. The Shah offered to assist Bhutto in developing a more
positive relationship with Sardar Daud of Afghanistan and an
invitation was extended to the Afghan President. Bhutto assured
him of a warm welcome from the people of Pakistan.

With Bhutto more confident given the success of his foreign
policy, by September 1976 the PPP election campaign was already
in high gear. Bhutto anticipated reconnecting with the coalition of
forces that brought him to power in 1971. He renewed his appeal
to women, to factory workers, to students, and to former
servicemen. His party also prepared a book of Bhutto’s quotations
that resembled the “Red Book” of Mao Zedong, who had passed
away that year. Showing his socialist inclinations, Bhutto extended
his nationalization scheme to include government control of
cotton-ginning, paddy-husking, and flour milling. He called the
middlemen running these operations “bloodsuckers” and said his
administration was determined to provide the farmers with a fair
share of the profits derived from their labor. The seizure of
property was a matter of executive will and not something subject
to parliamentary deliberation. Bhutto was attacked for such high-
handed actions, notably by an old PPP confidant who accused the
Chairman of putting the stick to the opposition politicians while
he doled out barrels of carrots to those who helped his cause.
Bhutto’s political opposition, however, was particularly critical of
the PPP program giving young army officers choice agricultural
land for the smallest fees.

Virtually all of Bhutto’s political and economic policies were
linked with his political survival and seldom with the country’s
development. Bhutto’s policies forced entrepreneurs to withdraw
their funds from Pakistan. Private investment under a government
that stunted or destroyed incentive became impossible. All that
seemed to matter to the PPP was holding the country together, and
the expenditures in the use of police power left little for
constructive endeavor. This was not lost on Bhutto’s critics, but
the Chairman continued to demonstrate that what was good for
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was also good for the nation. Bhutto truly
believed he was Pakistan’s benefactor and he expected those under
his command, like those affected by his rule, to display the proper
homage. Bhutto’s speech in December 1976 questioned how he
could be so misunderstood by his detractors. “A nation that



156 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

grudges honor to its leaders,” he declared, “is a nation that thinks
little of itself.”

Pakistan’s previous elections had all produced negative effects.
And it was not so long ago that the country’s first national election
was prelude to a horrific civil war that did not end until the country
had suffered terrible casualties, humiliation, and dismemberment.
Election experience therefore did not lend itself to positive
conclusions. Nevertheless, on January 7, 1977 Bhutto announced
that national elections would be held and that the imprisoned
politicians would be released to compete with PPP candidates.
Before the announcement, land reforms were again publicized, and
this time Bhutto reduced the size of large land-holdings so that
additional land could be made available to the landless tenant
farmers. But though special decrees and patronage could be
expected from the PPP administration, it was Bhutto’s transcendent
personality that was expected to carry the PPP to victory. Bhutto
believed he had framed the elections so that he could finally
eliminate his opposition. Although unstated, it was obvious to all
observers that he intended to establish an absolute dictatorship and
call it democracy. The Chairman’s goal was nothing less than a
mandate that would legitimate the drastic action he contemplated
taking against those who dared to challenge his authority.

Confronted with this challenge the opposition politicians did
the only thing left to them: they decided to combine their
organizations and to present the nation with a single slate of
candidates. Thus was assembled the Pakistan National Alliance
(PNA), a coalition whose sole purpose was the defeat of the PPP
and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. The PNA brought together the United
Democratic Front, the Tehrik-i-Istiqlal, and all the Islamist
political organizations. The PNA’s target from beginning to end
was the personality and rule of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. No issue of
public importance would be debated. It was not an election
involving rival platforms or philosophies of governing. It was all
too obvious the election revolved around one man and either
defeating him at the polls or suffering the consequences. The PNA
therefore zeroed in on Bhutto’s personal habits, his family
background, and his arrogant demeanor. Here was the opportunity
for all those aggrieved by the Chairman to express their concerns.
So it was in Karachi, where the mohajir community joined the



Redefining Pakistan 157

PNA. In war-ravaged Balochistan the Sardars rallied their people
to cast votes against PPP incumbents. On the North West Frontier,
people were reminded of the tactics used to destroy the National
Awami Party and of the imprisonment of Wali Khan. Even in the
Punjab, former followers and mentors of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto
beseeched the public to recognize the price to be paid in returning
Bhutto to power.

The elections and the aftermath

Ballots were cast on March 7, 1977 by approximately seventeen
million of the eligible thirty-one million voters. From the outset of
the voting, cries of fraud and voter manipulation were expressed
by members of the PNA. People were blocked from reaching the
polls in some areas, while PPP officials facilitated access for their
supporters. It was not long after the close of the voting stations
that the PPP claimed a landslide victory, winning sixty percent of
the vote and seventy-five percent of the National Assembly seats,
more than the two-thirds necessary to change the constitution and
alter the political system. Bhutto claimed his mandate but the
opposition was not done. With only seventeen percent of the seats
in the National Assembly the opposition realized it teetered on the
brink of disaster. Moreover, Bhutto had used the army’s Inter-
Services Intelligence Directorate to check on all candidates and
even the few candidates the PNA was likely to send to the National
Assembly were blocked from taking their seats by police order.
Nothing would be permitted to impede the work of the Bhutto
administration. The new Assembly convened immediately after the
official count. The new Pakistan of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was now to
be shaped to serve the views and ideas of the PPP Chairman.

The opposition leaders had known that the election would not
be fair. Despite Bhutto’s predictable victory, they knew he would
not be satisfied with a simple win. Bhutto envisaged a total
overhaul of the political system and he was determined to prevent
anyone from again challenging his authority, let alone embarrassing
him in public. When cries erupted of vote-rigging, Bhutto’s first
reaction was to deny the opposition claim, but he also ordered his
FSF to deal forcefully with those who he claimed opposed the will
of the people and the expression of the democratic process. In



158 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

response the PNA called for a countrywide strike and hoped to
shut down the nation. When the demonstrations degenerated into
widespread riots Bhutto ordered the FSF to crush the dissenters.
But by this time tens of thousands were pouring into the streets,
many as a consequence of actions launched by the Islamist parties,
notably the Jamaat-i-Islami, the Jamaat-ul-Ulema-i-Islam, and the
Jamiat-ul-Ulema-i-Pakistan. The fundamentalist parties vilified
Bhutto as a non-Muslim, accusing him of desecrating the religion
and undermining Islamic practices. Moreover, the Islamists had
penetrated the armed forces, especially the ISI and the army, and
large numbers of troops and commanding officers had been led to
believe that in opposing Bhutto they were making a sincere
statement about Islam.

When the FSF found their ranks insufficient to deal with the
civil unrest, Bhutto called upon the army to crush the protesters
and restore law and order. It was now Zia’s job to answer the call
of his beleaguered head of government, but Zia had to answer to
his army colleagues, and a number refused to act. Many officers
believed this was the time to eliminate the paramilitary FSF, hence
their decision to reject Bhutto’s plea. Disenchanted army officers
also cited the deteriorating economy, the uncontrolled inflation,
the inability to alleviate conditions resulting from crop failures,
the mismanagement of the nationalized industries, and the
corruption that permeated every sector of government and society.
Unemployment had sky-rocketed, sectarian and ethnic strife had
made a shambles of civil society, and the heavy expenditure on
government security protected the regime but did virtually nothing
for the nation.

Bhutto was advised to call new elections but he would listen to
nothing that would keep him from dominating events. Bhutto,
unlike Ayub Khan, was a maker of events and he refused to yield
to forces he believed he could control. The Chairman declared he
was prepared to meet with the opposition but only with the
understanding they had accepted the election results. He also
warned the opposition that he would deal with them ruthlessly if
they sustained the rioting and refused to rein in their supporters.
Bhutto’s defiance was a red flag to the angry crowds that coursed
through Pakistan’s cities and towns. The violence intensified with
every statement made by the PPP leader and, showing no fear, the



Redefining Pakistan 159

crowds locked in street battles with the FSF and police. The latter,
unable to quell the surging protesters, began to desert. Many
policemen abandoned their calling when shoot-to-kill orders were
implemented by some members of the FSF and the dead were left
to remind people why they had to sustain the fight. The scenes
were reminiscent of the days leading up to the army crackdown in
East Pakistan before the civil war. Only this time the army was
reluctant to become committed to a conflict it had no stomach for
and did not believe in. Too many Pakistanis had been murdered in
order to bring Bhutto to power, and now to sustain him hundreds,
possibly thousands, would have to be sacrificed. It was time to call
an end to the slaughter. It was also the time to inform Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto that he would no longer be permitted to construct his
personal dictatorship.

As a last-minute gesture to the Islamists Bhutto declared he had
placed a prohibition on the sale and use of alcoholic beverages, had
banned gambling, had closed the bars, nightclubs, and movie
theaters, and would move Pakistan toward the objective of a chaste
Islamic state. None of the religious leaders, however, was impressed
with this decree. Nor were the members of the Inter-Services
Intelligence who plotted Bhutto’s demise. Bhutto, nevertheless,
refused to acknowledge that the army had turned against him.
Instead, he publicly condemned the United States for interfering in
the country’s internal affairs. But this outcry was seen as a futile
gesture. Bhutto played his trump card when he called on General
Zia to declare martial law in Karachi, Hyderabad, and Lahore, the
most populous of Pakistani cities and the sites of the heaviest
rioting. Bhutto also addressed the corps commanders, insisting the
country was under siege from foreign sources and that their first
duty was the defense of the nation. The army command, however,
had had enough of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. The more he pleaded for
their support, and the more they yielded to his demands, the deeper
were the divisions within the ranks. Army discipline had now
become a key element as the generals pondered their next move.

Bhutto was accused of unleashing the most violent forces in
Pakistani society. The PPP Chairman had been called to bind up
the nation’s wounds following the devastating civil war and the
Indian invasion of East Pakistan. Instead he caused the armed
forces to question their capacity for good soldiering. Instead of



160 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

healing a demoralized country Bhutto had continued the blood-
letting. In the attempt to construct a permanent but personal
power base, he had undermined all attempts at nation building,
had ruined the economy, and had aggravated sectarian rivalries.
Thus, when Pakistan International Airlines and the Pakistan
Railway shut down operations in a display of unity with the
Pakistan National Alliance, the army could no longer wait on
events to take their course. On July 5, 1977, junior officers in the
Pakistan army signaled to their superiors that delay was no longer
an option. The army, they warned, would come apart if action
were not taken to oust the Prime Minister and terminate his
government. It was made clear that the choice lay in saving Bhutto
or saving the army. Zia hesitated for a moment, but then agreed to
save the army.

Bibliography
Ali, Akhtar, Pakistan’s Nuclear Dilemma: Energy and Security Dimen-

sions, Karachi: Economist Unit, 1983.
Ayoob, Mohammed, and Subrahmanyam, K., The Liberation War, New

Delhi: S. Chand, 1972.
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, Foreign Policy of Pakistan, Karachi: Pakistan

Institute of International Affairs, 1964.
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, The Quest for Peace, Karachi: Pakistan Institute of

International Affairs, 1966.
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, The Myth of Independence, Karachi: Oxford

University Press, 1969.
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, Speeches and Statements, Karachi: Government of

Pakistan, 1972.
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, Speeches and Statements, Karachi: Government of

Pakistan, 1973.
Burki, Shahid Javed, Pakistan under Bhutto, 1971–1977, New York:

St. Martin’s Press, 1980.
Hasan, Mubashir, The Mirage of Power: An Inquiry into the Bhutto

Years, 1971–1977, Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Janmahmad, Essays on Baloch National Struggle in Pakistan, Quetta,

Pakistan: Gosha-e-Adab, 1989.
Mascarenhas, Anthony, The Rape of Bangladesh, New Delhi: Vikas, 1972.
Mody, Piloo, Zulfi My Friend, Karachi: Paramount, 1973.
Rashid, Harun-or, The Foreshadowing of Bangladesh: Bengal Muslim

League and Muslim Politics, Dacca: Asiatic Society of Bangladesh,
1987.



Redefining Pakistan 161

Wolpert, Stanley, Zulfi Bhutto of Pakistan: His Life and Times, New
York: Oxford University Press, 1993.

Zaheer, Hasan, The Separation of East Pakistan: The Rise and
Realization of Bengali Nationalism, Karachi: Oxford University Press,
1994.

Zaman, Fakhar and Aman, Akhtar, Z.A. Bhutto: The Political Thinker,
Lahore: People’s Publications, 1973.

Ziring, Lawrence, Pakistan: The Enigma of Political Development,
Folkestone: Dawson, 1980.



162 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History



6
ISLAMIZATION

After a hiatus of some five years the army again assumed control of
Pakistan’s political process. The last period of army rule had lasted
more than thirteen years and few were prepared to forecast an
early return to civilian-controlled government this time. General
Zia’s initial statements and his treatment of the ousted Bhutto
administration were relatively placid, considering the anarchic
conditions that had caused the army to take over the government.
Zia had stated his intention to return the army to the barracks as
soon as quiet had been restored and new elections could be held.
Bhutto, he said, would be permitted to stump for his party and, if
successful in the projected polls, could yet again form the
government. Zia’s public statements, however, hardly revealed
the behind-the-scenes activity among the senior officers. The troops
that forced Zia’s hand and had demanded the removal of the Prime
Minister had no intention of permitting him to return to office.
Zia, it was said, was too rooted in more conventional civil–military
relations to recognize that this was no ordinary coup.

What was not detected was the transformation and birth of a
new Pakistan. So much attention had centered on the person of
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, on his personal dictatorship and the peculiar
manifestations of his rule, that there was little energy remaining to
fathom what Pakistan had become since the civil war. Now, in the
absence of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, it was possible to see more clearly

163



164 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

how Pakistan had been metamorphosed into a state so different
from the one represented by its founders. Unlike Yahya, Zia had
been reluctant to impose a junta-like government on Pakistan.
Following the civil war, and after assuming his command, Zia was
consumed by the need to re-establish army discipline and rebuild
confidence in the ranks. Moreover, the armed forces had suffered
from the cut-off of American military assistance. China had been
of some benefit, but Pakistan’s American-made weapons systems
were either in serious need of spare parts or obsolete.

Zia had refrained from taking direct action against the Bhutto
administration because of sustained disarray in the armed forces,
and when he did move, it was more because he did not have
complete control over his troops than out of conviction. Once he
had time to reflect on his takeover, however, Zia was a different
general with a different purpose. Although he had not anticipated
ruling the new Pakistan, in time he came to realize there was no
other alternative. He could not, as he first indicated, allow Bhutto
to return to office, and he was most reluctant to call upon another
civilian politician to organize a new government. Faced with a
Hobson’s choice, Zia decided to make the best of the situation and
the martial law imposed on July 5 was extended indefinitely.

Zia did not abrogate the 1973 constitution, believing its
suspension would permit him a degree of legitimacy not given
the Ayub and Yahya administrations. Moreover, by preserving the
document he could argue his actions were not only necessary but
also legal. At the same time, Zia revealed he had some very
definite ideas about Pakistan’s future. Since he was a very devout
Muslim, his faith influenced his actions. A more aloof observer of
Pakistan’s transformation following the dismemberment, the
General was a living example of its consequences. Zia viewed
the separation of East Bengal from Pakistan in roughly the same
way he viewed the separation of Pakistan from greater India
during the partition of 1947. Islam was the major concern in
forming the original Pakistan, and, for Zia, Islam was the only
reason for the perpetuation of the Pakistan that emerged from the
civil war. For Zia the fundamentalist orders and their political
organizations were no more a problem than the more conventional
secular parties. Moreover, the secular parties were responsible for
Pakistan’s sustained instability. It was these parties and their



Islamization 165

leaders that had betrayed the nation. The secular–Islamist struggle
was less a democratic–autocratic confrontation than an effort by
opportunist politicians to acquire personal gain. In Zia’s opinion,
therefore, the Islamist orders were not nearly the threat publicized
by the more secular politicians.

Zia in fact found something admirable and noble in the Islamist
objective. The desire to recreate Pakistan as an Islamic state was
not only more in keeping with the genius of the Pakistani nation, it
also elevated the formation of Pakistan to a moral plane not
experienced in the years since independence. The failure to
appreciate the people’s spiritual life in the mundane operations
of the nation, the tendency to model the country after European
example, the continuing dependence on foreign but non-Muslim
assistance had prevented the development of an ethos more
representative of the nation’s character and purpose. Zia’s surface
reaction was to reject political parties as incompatible with
Islamic teaching and unnecessary in circumstances that demanded
adherence to precepts of Islamic solidarity. Parties were arbitrarily
divisive and dysfunctional, given the basis of Islamic tradition.
Therefore, shortly after declaring he would not hold elections,
would sustain the ban on the political parties, and would not lift
martial law, Zia began to speak about the need for a Nizam-i-
Mustapha, a political system reminiscent of the Rule of the
Prophet. Zia’s reflections on the civil war involved the need to
bind up Pakistan’s self-inflicted wounds. It was his conclusion that
Pakistanis required a true Islamic state. Anything less, he believed,
would only lead to the further unraveling of the social fabric. Such
an outcome he was duty bound to prevent.

Before selecting Zia to head the army, Bhutto had pondered the
General’s overriding and consuming Islamic practice. At the
moment of decision, however, he judged it a welcome change from
an earlier generation of officers raised in the British colonial
tradition. Religious commitment was a more pronounced feature
of military service since the civil war. The shift from a colonial-
trained force to a more indigenous one was of critical importance.
Before independence, and under British tutelage, Muslim units had
been mixed with Hindu and Sikh components, and army discipline
was a function of line and command, servicemen ascribing to a
professional calling that demanded being true to one’s salt. Honor



166 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

among the troops was measured in obedience and a strict
hierarchy of command. Dominated by Englishmen, from the
lowest jawan to the most senior officer the army demonstrated its
respect for the Crown and swore allegiance to the Empire. By the
time of the Pakistan civil war, the generation of officers and men
that comprised the earlier Pakistan army were retired or dead.
A new generation emerged that possessed little if any personal
memory of that earlier army. In the absence of a colonial tradition,
the army’s focus was not the Crown but a Pakistan state that had
been forged to give voice to the Muslims of the subcontinent.
Nurtured in an ambience that emphasized the spiritual under-
pinnings of the country, and shorn of the colonial military
tradition, this new generation of soldiers developed an entirely
different outlook from that of their predecessors.

That outlook was deeply affected by the war in East Bengal.
Not only was the war seen as part of a larger Indian and therefore
Hindu conspiracy, but after India’s invasion of the country, its
defeat of the Pakistani garrison, and the humiliation suffered as a
consequence of the army surrender, Pakistanis found new resolve
in their Islamic faith. If Islam was declared to be in danger prior to
independence, it was now judged to face an even more significant
and more tangible threat. It is notable that the Jamaat-i-Islami, the
primary fundamentalist party in East Pakistan at the time of
the civil war, stood with the Pakistan army in its struggle with the
Bengali Mukhti Bahini. The East Bengal Jamaat never criticized
the brutality inflicted on the Bengalis by Pakistani forces and in
fact had taken the position that the Awami League of Mujibur
Rahman, like the National Awami Party of Maulana Bhashani,
represented heathen forces and therefore deserved to be crushed.
The apocalyptic nature of the Pakistan army’s assault on the
Bengali nation illustrated a classic contest between Islam and its
mortal enemies. Even in defeat, the Pakistani army had fought the
good fight against forces that would undo the Islamic tradition in
the subcontinent. The civil war and India’s intervention therefore
provided the Pakistani army with its true baptism, that is, a
liberation war to free Pakistan from the grip of the non-believer.
In its despair and humiliation the Pakistan army, and certainly an
important portion of its officer corps, found solace in their
religious devotions. It was this army that Zia assumed the



Islamization 167

leadership of in 1976. Although he personally did not experience
the crucible of civil war or taste the bitter Indian victory over
Pakistani arms, his personal instincts were in harmony with the
soldiers whose lives were forever changed by the experience.

The Jamaat-i-Islami was an unambiguous presence in the
Pakistan that emerged after independence. Its attempt to recruit
followers from among the younger members of the population met
with considerable success. Never holding the view that it could
achieve its objectives through the electoral process, the Jamaat
of Maulana Maudoodi and his successors was content with the
awareness that they had created an organic organization
composed of elite members of the community and capable of
overcoming numerous obstacles. Since they preached an austere
version of Islamic practice, only the creation of a chaste Muslim
state governed by Shari’a would satisfy their standards. Always a
determined adversary of the Muslim League, the Jamaat opposed
the Pakistan Movement and condemned its leaders. Beyond
the range of the competitive secular political organizations, the
Jamaat sustained its assault on the several governments organized
to serve Pakistan during the first parliamentary period. Later a
critic of the Ayub and Yahya administrations, it never accepted
their secular programs or the associations they forged with the
United States during the cold war. Moreover, the Jamaat’s
message, although not attractive to the majority of Pakistanis,
nevertheless drew a large following, and particular inroads were
made in the armed forces. Zia, among others, was influenced by
the teachings of the Jamaat-i-Islami. Thus, when Bhutto accused
Zia of linking forces with the Jamaat in an effort to destroy him, it
was not an unsupported charge. More difficult to prove, however,
was Bhutto’s claim that the United States government had
bankrolled the Jamaat, as it had the PNA, in an effort to influence
the outcome of the 1977 election.

Zia’s attention, however, centered on the consolidation of
power. Bhutto’s Federal Security Force had threatened the armed
forces because it theoretically had the leverage to decimate the
military ranks as well as assume responsibilities normally within
the ambit of the traditional services. Moreover, a secret police
agency answering only to the Prime Minister posed a threat to
uniformed personnel as much as it did to the civilian population.



168 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Federal Security Force operations targeted members of military
families and the excesses of the organization were known
personally to army officers. Among Zia’s first decisions therefore
was the destruction of the FSF. Its director, Masood Mahmood,
and other high-placed officials of the agency were arrested and
ordered to testify about their actions in support of the Bhutto
government. Accused of intimidation, torture, and murder, FSF
agents revealed what they knew about the organization’s behavior
and programs. Most important they implicated Bhutto in virtually
all their operations. Following this testimony, Bhutto was formally
accused of ordering the FSF to murder a rival politician.

The Quaid-i-Awam could not escape the avalanche of charges
by members of the now abolished Federal Security Force. All
crimes attributed to the FSF were linked to Bhutto’s commands,
and not the least of their revelations was the Prime Minister’s
sinful behavior. Described as having violated Islamic tradition,
Bhutto was accused of womanizing, imbibing alcoholic beverages,
and committing blasphemy. Bhutto’s practices were publicized as
an assault on Islamic tradition, and his more recent public
expressions of piety were ridiculed as signs of desperation, not
repentance. Zia’s personal piety was juxtaposed against that of the
erstwhile Prime Minister, and there is little doubt the General saw
the opportunity to elevate his credentials among the fundamentalist
orders by further exposing what was deemed to be the illicit
behavior of the fallen leader. Bhutto became the instrument for a
national catharsis while Zia gave increasing importance to the
country’s national genius, its Islamic tradition. Thus, religious
calling merged with political aspirations, and a soldier’s discipline
gave resonance to the idea of personal jihad, that is, the need for
self-improvement and inner transformation. Zia rejected the
creature comforts of being the head of state and chose to remain
in his spartan home in the army cantonment at Rawalpindi.
The latter decision allowed Zia not only to portray himself as
indifferent to material things, but also to maintain close
surveillance of army activity. Unlike Ayub, Zia did not intend to
pass command of the Pakistan army to one of his subordinates.

Zia’s conservative lifestyle and his limited personal needs left
little for the officers under his command to quarrel about.
Moreover, the General’s Islamic practices were made in plain



Islamization 169

sight and his orders to his troops to rededicate their lives to
religious expression was something he already imposed on
himself. Originally a reluctant coup leader, once he had assumed
the responsibility of high office, Zia rose to the occasion and
settled in for what would be a long reign. Agreeing with those
around him that new elections would provide Bhutto with a
platform from which to criticize the army high command, Zia
took the decision to arrest and try him for the murder of Ahmad
Raza Kasuri. Former FSF officers turned state’s evidence and
testified that the Prime Minister had ordered the assault resulting
in the death of Kasuri. Found guilty in March 1978, Bhutto was
sentenced to death. An extended appeal process followed while
the condemned was confined to a prison cell. During this period
Zia formally assumed the office of President of Pakistan. Appealed
to from capitals around the world, Zia refused to consider pleas
for mercy. Instead, the government issued a series of White Papers
purporting to enumerate the crimes of the erstwhile Quaid-i-
Awam. They all justified the death verdict. Bhutto pleaded his
innocence from his Rawalpindi cell and spoke of dying at the
hands of usurpers. No amount of pleading, however, dissuaded
Zia from carrying out the court’s sentence. Arguing that Islamic
justice must be done, Zia rejected calls for clemency. On April 4,
1979, his appeals exhausted, Bhutto was led to the gallows and
hanged.

Zia and Islamist politics

Others had played with the idea of the Islamic state and much lip
service had been given to that objective, but Zia was the first to
truly profess that goal as his greatest duty. Secular forces had
dominated Pakistani politics and a thin veneer of sophisticated
Pakistanis had influenced the course of the nation’s politics.
Election results, though meager and full of controversy, were
nevertheless representations of secular forces. The masses of
Pakistanis who were tempted to the polls seldom cast ballots as a
consequence of personal preference. In an agrarian society
dominated by the land-holding class, the largely rural population
was more likely to vote for the wishes of the local patriarch than
their own conscience. As such, the religious parties seldom had



170 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

much attraction to the average voter, and their poor showing
appeared to reinforce the secular characteristics of the state. Zia
sought to change that condition. Under the veil of martial law Zia
experienced a minimum of opposition to his policies. Moreover,
Pakistan’s population had already experienced so much army
intervention that the situation was more the norm than the
exception. The people of Pakistan made the adjustment back to
army rule with little apparent difficulty, especially given the
popular desire to restore society to relative normalcy. The nation
had been so consumed by violence since the passing of Ayub Khan
that anyone promising the restoration of law and order was a
welcome addition to the political scene. Even more so if that
individual leader offered a vision that reflected the genius of the
larger nation.

The civil war in East Pakistan was too recent to have escaped the
memory of the Pakistani people. Zia understood the consequences
of that war and how it had forever changed the nation. Also aware
that divisive forces continued to threaten what remained of
Pakistan and cognizant that the Islamic religion was the only
common denominator, Zia was convinced the building of an
Islamic polity was all that stood between the nation and total
anarchy. Zia therefore catered to those calling for a chaste Muslim
state. He became even more mindful of the role Kashmir played
in shaping the mentality of the masses, and he was determined to
exploit the nation’s longing for a society dedicated to the
proposition that Islam not democracy was the single objective of
all the country’s citizens. Moreover, in emphasizing Islamic
tradition, the General trod on familiar ground and had no need
for foreign experts. Islamic practice came naturally to the
country’s illiterates and no instruction was required in defining
the relationship between the rulers and the ruled.

Zia therefore ignored “Basic Democracy” experiments and
avoided parliamentary governance. He rejected the political party
arrangements and, especially, competitive politics. Pakistani
politics had developed an overwhelmingly negative character, the
goal being to outdo your rival by whatever means, irrespective of
the impact on the nation. Self-aggrandizement not public service
was the result of such a system and as the politicians fiddled, the
people were ignored and the country was allowed to sink deeper



Islamization 171

into the morass. Zia therefore had no compunctions about
abandoning traditional politics. Little, he argued, was lost and
much could be gained if he were free to move the nation along a
different path.

Zia’s central constituency was the armed forces and especially
the army, from the rank and file to the senior officer class. He
especially catered to those army officers who were imbued with
the Islamic tradition, who practiced their religious tenets, and who
believed as he did that the nation’s future pivoted on the
realization of an integrated Muslim community. Zia used the
1973 constitution to press his goals, starting with the Provisional
Constitution Order of March 1981, which prevented challenges
to his authority. Zia’s idea of a constitutional order focused less on
the limitation of government power and more on the need to
strengthen executive rule. The country had suffered considerable
trauma and a firm hand was required to assure the populace that
their government was capable of managing events. Clearly, there
was no way to justify both the preservation of the constitution and
the sustaining of martial law, but the obvious contradiction did not
cause Zia to falter or hesitate in the pursuit of his real objective.
Zia’s vision had nothing to do with grand designs. His purpose was
stabilizing the nation and the furtherance of goals that merged the
spiritual with the temporal. Zia promised a new beginning.

In December 1982, in the course of a speech celebrating the birth
anniversary of the Prophet, Zia emphasized the need to direct
Pakistani life in accordance with the teachings of the Qur’an and
Sunnah. The role of all Muslims, he declared, was to propagate the
faith and emulate the performance of their great spiritual leader.
With his government and leading members of the Islamist orders
surrounding him, Zia called for a renewal of the requirement of
jihad, and said that his government had been instructed to explore
holy scripture in the formation of the Nizam-i-Mustapha. Citing
the need to adopt Islamic jurisprudence, he spoke of strengthening
the social fabric through a process of “Islamization.” Zia cited the
Islamic requirements of zakat (alms) and ushr (the tax on
agriculture) that traditionally provided the state with the funds
needed to assist those unable to provide adequately for themselves.
Zia also described the operation of qisas (the right of pre-emption)
and diyat (the laws of evidence), as well as the official establishment



172 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

of Qazi courts that were to be headed by religious judges. Zia
called for the formation of an Islamic judicial system and a form
of commercial and financial practices that conformed with the
principles of Islamic jurisprudence. The intended Islamic reforms
were supposed to root out corruption as well as prevent the
exploitation of the weaker members of society. But they also
impacted on the secular legal fraternity and undermined the
preserve of the country’s cosmopolitan elite.

Not everyone was pleased with the implementation of the
Islamization program. Wealthier entrepreneurs questioned their
ability to do business across a broad international spectrum, and,
rather than struggle against the government’s directives, many
moved their assets outside the country, while still others decided to
follow their funds and took up residence abroad. Zia questioned
such behavior and in an effort to prevent a mass exodus, imposed
restrictions on the outflow of funds as well as on foreign travel.
Zia insisted his program was not meant to antagonize the
bellwethers of society, or to entrench him in power. The country,
he said, suffered from moral decay, and the social fiber needed
strengthening so that it would not again suffer humiliation,
division, and defeat. Calling for a genuine demonstration of piety,
selflessness, and the highest ethical standards, Zia envisioned a
new Pakistan that he believed could become a model to all the
Muslim nations. According to the General, political parties failed
to contribute to this design, and hence could be ignored, if not
abandoned. Parties were the bastions of would-be powerful men
and had done nothing to enhance the well-being of the nation.
Locked in uncompromising conflict they had already inflicted
severe wounds on Pakistan, and were directly responsible for the
civil war and the loss of East Pakistan. Yahya had permitted the
leaders of the principal political parties to dominate him, and Zia
let it be known he would not be such easy prey.

A student of Islamic tradition, Zia found nothing about political
parties in its teachings and he was left to conclude they had been
adopted from alien cultures. He therefore had no hesitation in
rejecting them. He also understood that in banning the political
parties he faced little organized opposition and thus was free to
press ahead with his scheme to reconstruct Pakistan in ways that
would emphasize the country’s Muslim character. Another



Islamization 173

dimension of Zia’s thinking was the disappearance of the country’s
largest minority community, which had resided in East Pakistan.
Free of its Southeast Asian wing, Pakistan was truly a Muslim
entity, its human composition verging on homogeneity.

Though intent on moving ahead with Islamization, Zia never-
theless sustained the otherwise secular constitution from which he
drew his legitimacy. Zia understood his program was more likely
to appeal to the masses than the elite, but he still saw the necessity
for keeping the more secular members of society in his camp. To
appeal to both traditionalists and secularists was no simple task,
especially when the latter saw their values and worldview so
forcefully criticized. Zia therefore sought to have the constitution
amended to provide the armed forces with a permanent stake in
the country’s governance. Citing the probity and dedication of the
soldiers under his command, Zia indicated that their leadership
qualities required replication in society at large. As selfless
workers in the cause of God and country, the soldiers would
continue to lead Pakistan long after his departure.

The realities of Zia’s Islamist policy

Zia was conditioned not only by his Islamic experience and
military service; he was also a creature of events, and the events
that brought him to power were without question defining. The
loss of East Pakistan had revitalized provincial forces, and
secessionist movements were barely concealed in the violent
language of those who had long struggled against the creation of
Pakistan and now were even more energized by the possibilities
for regional self-determination. Pakistan had been established
with the belief “Islam was in danger,” but the events following
independence had failed to give substance to that call. Islam was
never in danger and the multitudes who identified with Muslim
practice continued to expand within the subcontinent as well as
throughout the world. The Pakistan of 1947 was never meant to
relieve those anxious about the future of the Islamic religion.
Moreover, Jinnah’s almost immediate portrayal of Pakistan as a
home to all, whether Muslim or non-Muslim, contradicted the
establishment of Pakistan as a haven for those Muslims otherwise
unable to practice their faith.



174 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Although a huge number of Indian Muslims left or were forced
to leave their homes in India, an even larger number chose not to
leave, suggesting that Muslims could be integrated in a largely
Hindu India despite the Pakistan government’s repeated declara-
tion that the Indian government was a menace to the Muslim way
of life. For this the Pakistan government fell back on the Kashmir
issue, impressing upon the national psyche that the threat posed by
Hindu claims to Kashmir threatened all the Muslims of the
subcontinent and especially the majority Muslim state of Pakistan.
Furthermore, India’s rejection of the Pakistani claim to Kashmir
served to reinforce a Pakistan government demand that drew
particular support from those most opposed to the creation of the
nation, the country’s Islamist representatives. The Islamists found
their destiny in the failure to resolve the Kashmir dispute. So long
as that Kashmir dilemma remained, and Pakistan and India
confronted one another over a dividing line that obviated the
possibility of a compromise solution, the Islamists were guaranteed
an audience and a following, as well as government support out of
all proportion to their numbers.

The war in East Pakistan that climaxed with the independence
of Bangladesh demonstrated that the struggle was never one
involving Islam in danger. The brutality witnessed during the civil
war, the slaughter of Muslims by Muslims, revealed the hollowness
of that concern. Although Pakistanis were prone to cite the civil
war as a product of Hindu and Indian machinations, there could
be no getting round the charge by Muslim Bengalis that they had
been maltreated, exploited, and abused by their brethren in the
west of the subcontinent. India played midwife to the creation of
Bangladesh, but it also brought an end to the civil strife. New
Delhi was ultimately responsible for the dismemberment of
Pakistan, but it was Pakistan’s power seekers who created the
conditions precipitating the Indian assault on the eastern province.
Zia was certainly aware of these events, but Bangladesh was a
reality and there was no reversing the situation when he forced
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto from power and imposed his own brand of
rule on the country.

Zia’s task, as he saw it, was to prevent yet more ambitious
power seekers from doing further damage to the nation. Not only
had Bhutto played a major role in the break-up of Pakistan, but



Islamization 175

during his subsequent administration the country seemed on the
verge of splitting into self-governing units. For Zia and the
generals who reinforced his authority the only answer to the forces
of separation was the old call of Islam in danger, and hence it was
his determination to rally the nation, once again appealing to the
people’s abiding spiritual commitment.

That appeal assumed new dimensions when in December 1979
the Soviet Union sent its army into Afghanistan. Afghanistan had
experienced several upheavals immediately before the Soviet
invasion. In 1973 the Afghan monarchy was abolished. King
Zahir Shah was forced into exile and his cousin, Mohammad
Daud, declared Afghanistan would be a republic. Daud made
himself President of the new Afghanistan, but in 1978 he too was
overthrown. This time the change in government was initiated by
Afghan Communists, who were no less divided over the nation’s
future. In the end their inability to resolve their differences
precipitated the Red Army invasion. The Soviets installed their
protégé, Babrak Karmal, in Kabul, but the popular resistance that
had been aroused when Daud was killed now centered attention
on the expulsion of the Communists. The war that ensued caused
the flight of several million Afghan refugees, the majority seeking
refuge in Pakistan. General Zia was hard pressed to accommodate
the mass influx. Moreover, the presence of the Red Army in
immediate proximity to Pakistan’s frontier led Zia, like others at
home and abroad, to conclude Moscow’s target was not Kabul
but Islamabad. In addition, Indira Gandhi was returned to office
in New Delhi within weeks of the Soviet invasion, and her
anti-Pakistan bias was now translated into the other arm of a
pincer movement that squeezed Pakistan on its eastern border.
Concerned that the Soviets and Indians were determined
to exploit Pakistan’s domestic problems, especially its ethnic
conflicts, Zia had good reason to conclude that Pakistan faced
mortal danger.

The call to Pakistani Muslims to band together, to overcome
their differences, to protect their Islamic heritage now attained a
resonance not experienced previously. Zia needed no further
convincing that destiny had called him to serve Pakistan, to bind
up its wounds, and to prepare the nation for the struggle that lay
ahead. In Zia’s thinking only Islam offered the integrating factor



176 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

that linked Pakistanis with one another, and also Pakistan with the
Muslims of Afghanistan. Although the two countries were long
adversaries across a troubled Durand Line, Pakistan’s assistance to
the Afghan refugee community as well as to the mujahiddin
resistance changed their relationship in the most dramatic manner.
And if this were not drama enough, Iran too, another important
neighbor of Pakistan, had experienced epoch-making changes.
The Shah of Iran, and the Pahlavi dynasty that had been founded
after World War I, was swept away by a revolution in 1979. In
short order, that revolution became the vehicle of Islamic
fundamentalists represented by the looming personality of
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, a charismatic Shiite cleric. After
a brief period of secular rule, Iran came under the sway of the men
in black robes and the country was almost overnight transformed
from the most liberal and open of Islamic societies into one of the
most conservative and austere. All of these events impacted on
Pakistan, and with General Zia ul-Haq at the helm of Pakistani
affairs it was a foregone conclusion that his emphasis on
Islamization would take on even greater urgency.

Pakistan not only became environmentally friendly to dedicated
Islamists; it was now to be influenced by Muslims in the armed
forces, the student population, and the circle of literati whose work
was shaped by Islamic tradition. The more secular intelligentsia
were sidetracked by events, their collective voice reduced to a
whisper among those appealing to the spiritual dimensions of the
larger society. Zia continued to confront his opposition, but he
was granted a coalition of supporters that assured his durability as
the country’s leader. A combination of events – Zia’s Islamization
program, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and the Iranian
revolution – occurring almost simultaneously added up to the
failure of the secular national state that had tracked emerging
Muslim nations since the close of World War II. The rise of the
Islamist state in Iran, as elsewhere in the Muslim world, was
forecast in the work of some obscure philosophical writers of
contemporary Islam, particularly in Egypt and Sudan. Islamic
movements assumed a new dynamism during this period and all
these events fueled a religious fervor that affected Muslims on a
broad plane. Leaders and movements that articulated a new vision
for Muslims sought to replace the heavily European-influenced



Islamization 177

past with a present filled with the glories and opportunities of
Islam. Zia was caught up in an Islamic renaissance that moved
from North Africa through the Middle East to South and Central
Asia and on to Southeast Asia.

He found himself in the hub of a wheel that radiated out
in different directions, but most immediately to neighboring
Afghanistan. Afghan refugees not only brought their needs to
Pakistan’s open door, they also flooded the country with narcotics
and weapons. The tribal border region had never developed
intimate ties with the central government and it had long been
considered good policy to allow the tribal people as much
autonomy as Pakistan’s sovereignty could permit. But with a war
raging to its west, Pakistan could not avoid becoming involved in
the tribal belt as well as in Afghanistan. Not wanting to challenge
the Soviets directly, Zia offered indirect support to the Afghan
resistance, whose several organizations established their head-
quarters in and around the Pakistani city of Peshawar. Pakistan
did not wish to signal to Moscow that it intended to challenge
Soviet power, but Islamabad refused to recognize the Babrak
Karmal government in Kabul and brought the issue of the Soviet
invasion to the General Assembly of the United Nations.

Pakistani aid to Afghanistan’s different resistance organizations
centered attention on the Islamist parties in the conflict. As early as
the 1950s the Islamist movements in Afghanistan were associated
with the Muslim Brotherhood of Egypt and the Jamaat-i-Islami
of Pakistan. The writings of Sayyid Qutb in Egypt and Maulana
Maudoodi in Pakistan were most influential, and they inspired
Sibghatullah Mujaddedi, Burhanuddin Rabbani, and Maulvi Yunis
Khalis, the latter two being graduates of Cairo’s Al-Azhar
University. The Egyptian Brotherhood and the Pakistani Jamaat
were linked by their mutual struggle to realize a Pan-Islamic state
and their intention to see the total transformation of Muslim
society. The published works of Qutb and Maudoodi were
translated into the Afghan Dari and Pashtu languages and were
used to influence the thinking of other young Afghans unhappy
with the plight of their country, much of which they attributed to
the profligate and secular lifestyle of their rulers.

The political teaching of the Islamists could be found in
Pakistan as well as Afghanistan. General Zia was himself heavily



178 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

influenced by the teachings of learned and articulate contemporary
Muslim theologians. Zia acknowledged the power of the Muslim
faith and he did little to rein in the excesses of the ulema. The
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 had accelerated a
movement that already had little concern for national borders
nor, for that matter, any respect for national Muslim leaders who
were judged too connected to Western nations, and especially to
the Americans. By contrast with the liberal ideas espoused in the
West, the Islamist movement, from its beginning, was demanding
and oppressive and anticipated complete submission to its cause.
The Islamists at Kabul University formed a Muslim Youth
Organization and by 1970 this was already the most important
political force in the country. Among its ranks and eventually
assuming leadership roles were Ahmad Shah Masood and
Gulbadin Hekmatyar. Increasing in strength, the Islamists of
Afghanistan extended their influence among the talib (students)
of the nation’s madrassahs, and the most radical of the country’s
Islamic teachers. The Islamists supported Daud when he called for
an end to Afghanistan’s monarchy, but they also did everything in
their power to undermine Daud’s republican government. Indeed,
the damage done to the Daud experiment set the scene for the
Communist revolution in 1978. Daud had enlisted the services
of the Parcham branch of the Communist Party of Afghanistan.
In combination with the Khalq wing that attracted the more
nationalist Communists, the leftists vied with the Islamists for
ultimate control of the country. Daud’s repression of the Islamists,
the arrest of hundreds of their more active members, left the
Communists with a free hand when their time came to seize
control of the government. The Communists were quick to order
the execution of Islamists after assuming power.

The Islamist struggle against Communist rule now reached a
new level. Forming themselves into mujahiddin, the Islamists took
to clandestine attacks on Communist forces. The Parcham and
Khalq branches began to quarrel over strategy and find fault with
one another. Mohammad Taraki, a Parcham leader operating in
tandem with the Soviet KGB, was ordered by Moscow to
eliminate Hafizullah Amin, the Khalqi nationalist whose policies
were aimed at inflicting even greater punishment on the Islamists.
Moscow had called for moderation in dealing with the religious



Islamization 179

orders, but Hafizullah Amin was not to be appeased. Hence
Moscow’s decision to eliminate him. On the Islamist side, the
Communist government was seen as an enlarging menace. The
Islamist movement also suffered from internal controversy and it
fell back on its earlier factions, each led by a different leader,
representing the complex ethnic and social conditions prevailing
in Afghanistan. Thus, the split in the Communist ranks was
matched among the Afghan Islamists. The Islamist principals in
this sequence were Rabbani, a Tajik, who wanted a broad alliance,
and Hekmatyar, a Pashtun Islamist intellectual, who insisted upon
an aggressive armed struggle against certain Muslims as well as
against infidels in and outside Afghanistan. Rabbani led the
Jamiat-i-Islami, Hekmatyar’s organization bore the name Hizb-i-
Islami. Although they were rivals, the brutality of the Communist
takeover of the country, and later the Soviet invasion, brought
them into common cause, but nothing could cement their
relationship.

Hafizullah Amin’s killing of Mohammad Taraki and the
intensification of mujahiddin attacks on Soviet operations in
Afghanistan caused the Kremlin to send the Red Army across the
Amu Darya in December 1979. Moscow had no intention of
allowing a reversal of the Communist revolution in the country.
Believing Hafizullah Amin’s policies provided the mujahiddin with
even greater leverage, the invading force killed the Khalq leader
and established a government more favorable to the Parcham
position. With both Taraki and Amin dead, the Soviets selected
Babrak Karmal to head the new Afghan government. The
mujahiddin, however, were not to be pacified. The Jamiat-i-Islam
forces under Burhanuddin Rabbani took up arms against the
Soviets in the northern areas of Afghanistan. They fought the
invading force from Badakhshan to Mazar-i-Sharif. In the region
of the Salang Pass and Panjsher Valley, it was the Tajik Ahmad
Shah Masud who resisted the Soviet invasion. It was Masud too,
along with Tajik and Uzbek commanders, who established the
Council of the Northern Areas. Masud’s force was the most
effective fighting unit in the Afghan resistance and he answered to
no one save his mentor Rabbani. Hekmatyar, many years junior
to Rabbani, was the charismatic leader of the Hizb-i-Islami. More
inclined to operate independently, it was less organized than



180 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Rabbani’s force and therefore less effective. More the Islamic
fundamentalist, however, Hekmatyar appealed to the Pashtun
tribes on both sides of the Afghan–Pakistani border. His puritanical
version of Islam was more akin to the Khomeini model, but
nevertheless he represented the orthodox Sunni Muslim tradition.
Hekmatyar made it clear his objective was not simply the defense
of Afghanistan but the creation of a purist Islamic republic, and he
attracted support from a wide variety of social groups, from the
Pashtun tribes along the frontier with Pakistan to the educated
youth of Kabul University.

Zia was witness to these events as well as the behavior of the
principals in the Afghan resistance. Because all the groups were
located in the Peshawar area and drew support from the Pakistan
government, Zia was in a position to determine which among
them deserved more of his assistance. Moreover, two additional
major actors were added to the picture within months of the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Pakistan had developed relations
with the countries of the Arabian Peninsula and many of their
leaders had found Pakistan a welcome place to vacation, to hunt,
and to gain support for their international policies. Saudi Arabia
was especially interested in South and Central Asia following the
Soviet occupation of Kabul. Riyadh agreed to assist Pakistan with
its efforts to obtain cheap fuel and to purchase armaments. It also
was ready to provide the needed assistance to support the influx of
Afghan refugees. Desperate for help, Islamabad was not about
to shun such aid. Moreover, Zia’s emphasis on Islamization was a
positive element in cementing Pakistan–Saudi-Arabian ties. The
two countries cooperated in numerous social programs aimed at
relieving some of the tensions between the refugee and indigenous
populations. Medical assistance and especially educational pro-
grams were particular gifts to the Afghan people from Saudi
Arabia, and Afghan and Pakistani madrassahs along their mutual
frontier received special attention.

The matter of distributing aid to the refugees, and to the
mujahiddin resistance, was given to the Pakistan army. But
because Islamabad was avoiding direct confrontation with
Moscow, the segment of the army most involved was the more
secretive and aloof ISI. More familiar with the Pashtuns and more
closely identified with the Islamist philosophy of the Hizb-i-Islami,



Islamization 181

the ISI determined that they, especially the forces underHekmatyar’s
command, would become the major recipient of military
assistance. The Pakistan ISI therefore became Zia’s extension into
Afghanistan, especially in the theater of operations from Kabul
to Kunar and from Kunduz to Parwan. Moreover the ISI was
linked with the fighting that ensued between the Hizb-i-Islami and
the other resistance groups, especially those under the command
of Ahmad Shah Masud.

The ISI did not liaise with Masud, who saw the Pakistanis as
interlopers more bent on capitalizing on Afghanistan’s plight than
assisting it in repulsing the Soviet Union. Inter-Services Intelligence
agents were better disposed to the most radical Islamist causes,
and in Masud’s view the Pakistani intrusion was intended to
spread Zia’s power into Afghanistan. Moreover, when the United
States decided to play a major role in support of the mujahiddin,
and President Ronald Reagan ordered major military transfers to
Pakistan, the ISI convinced the CIA that the Hizb-i-Islami of
Hekmatyar would make the better use of American aid.
Washington’s concern did not take into account Hekmatyar’s
intimacy with revolutionary Iran, or his open invitation to
domicile in Iranian Balochistan. The Americans were convinced
that in choosing the Pashtuns over the Tajiks, Uzbeks, and other
northern ethnic groups, they would be choosing the more
dedicated fighters against international Communism.

The CIA’s sole mission was the defeat of the Red Army, and the
United States became party to an alliance that promoted the most
aggressive form of Islamic fundamentalism. Into this mix was
poured a Saudi Arabian Wahhabi Islamic program. With Khomeini
preaching Islamic revolution and seemingly capable of influencing
Muslims everywhere, the Saudis were determined not to lose the
initiative. Saudi Arabia became a major actor in the Afghan drama
as it zealously promoted the most chaste form of Sunni Islam. The
Americans were too busy with the Soviets to understand the many
forces shaping the region’s future. In their support for Zia’s
fundamentalism, however, the Americans unknowingly had made
a strategic decision. Consumed by the politics of the cold war,
American intentions centered on forcing the Red Army from
Afghanistan. What might follow such an outcome, Washington
failed to factor into its analysis. For all their concern with



182 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

fundamentalist developments in Iran, the Americans failed to
recognize the changes sweeping the Islamic world, and most
immediately Afghanistan and Pakistan.

The Zia legacy

Zia was a creature of events and he made the most of them. More
prescient to the confrontation of complex forces, he reduced them
all to the simple formula of Islamic renaissance. Protecting his
base of operations meant working with a military junta that
seldom questioned his authority. The army had taken a heavy
blow in the 1971 war with India. A decade after that débâcle it
was still in need of restructuring. The war in Afghanistan had
provided the Pakistan armed forces with an opportunity to prove
their mettle. With the extraordinary military assistance suddenly
made available by the Reagan administration, the armed forces
once again had an assured future. An initially hesitant Zia was
transformed into a forceful and determined leader. His refusal to
offer mercy to Bhutto was not lost on those around him. His
determination to transform Pakistan into a true Muslim state
began after Pakistan’s dismemberment, but his vision took on
greater meaning with the Khomeini-led revolution in Iran and
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Zia understood the strength of
his Muslim convictions and, though he faced unprecedented
challenges, he was nonetheless convinced that his spiritual
foundation was secure and would sustain him. Zia was no
Hamlet. Not given to contemplation or second guessing, he set a
course that he did not intend to deviate from. When others were
confused, or hesitated, Zia was prepared to show the way. Zia’s
demeanor had changed. He was eager to assume the responsibility
destiny had imposed upon him. Guided by inner spiritual
experience, he refused to believe he could not accomplish great
goals.

Zia had become a man with a mission. Unpopular in political
circles, he was reinforced in his view that the politicians were a
negative element in Pakistan’s design. As much as he suffered their
criticism, he was just as prepared to strip them of their capacity to
influence the country’s development. Zia made no apologies for
denying political parties the opportunity to compete in future



Islamization 183

elections. He genuinely believed political parties were inherently
evil and that the politicians were not only without virtue but that
they followed an alien tradition. Organizers of the Movement for
the Restoration of Democracy (MRD) were therefore intimidated
or arrested. When lower-echelon politicians tried to fill the political
vacuum created by the incarceration of their leaders, they too were
contained and their voices muted. Professional organizations and
women’s groups picked up the cause and demanded a lifting of
press restrictions, as well as the strict accountability of men in
positions of responsibility. But these demands too remained
unanswered.

The MRD tried a number of tactics, at one point enlisting the
services of the labor unions, but that too proved unproductive.
The government’s foreign policy was criticized, especially the call
to sever ties to the United States and to establish Pakistan as a
non-aligned state. This too fell on deaf ears. The MRD called for
a mass day of protest in August 1983. Fearing the Zia-led junta
was about to issue a proclamation eliminating any possibility that
Pakistan would again experience parliamentary politics, the
political opposition brought their legions into the streets, but that
tactic also failed. Zia had already established his Majlis-i-Shura,
or Muslim consultative assembly. Composed of almost three
hundred members, the body was the President’s answer to his
political critics and their demand for representative government.
The Majlis-i-Shura was an appointed, not an elected body, and its
powers were defined in the presidential order that created it. It had
the power to recommend laws, to suggest amendments to existing
laws, and to discuss the annual budget and five-year development
plan. It could also seek information from government agencies.
But it was not a genuine legislature. It could not initiate laws or
see its recommendations become law. Ostensibly called to advise
the ruling junta, it satisfied certain Islamic traditions, but it was
not given the authority to check the executive.

Zia packed the Shura with members of the ulema and mashaikh
(students of Islam). He also included farmers, industrial workers,
engineers, landowners, and assorted professionals. Places were
reserved for women and minorities, and the government argued
the assembly was more representative of the nation than anything
before it. Zia also chose the speaker of the Shura, as well as its



184 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

vice-chairmen. All officers were called to swear allegiance to the
government under the Constitutional Order of 1981, the law that
established the legal foundation of Zia’s rule. Critics cited Zia’s
monopolization of power. They also noted the scores of politicians
who had left their political parties to become members of the
Majlis-i-Shura. Opportunism among politicians was a common
experience and that tradition was sustained through the Zia
reforms. Moreover, the fundamentalist Islamist parties like the
Jamaat-i-Islami, the Jamiatul-Ulema-i-Pakistan, and the Pagaro
Muslim League were not averse to the formation of the Shura,
which in a way hinted at the formation of a more credible Islamic
state.

The Majlis-i-Shura met in two sessions in 1982 and three in
1983. In the meantime Zia authorized the Council of Islamic
Ideology to question all laws on the books that in its judgment
were repugnant to Islam. He also gave new importance to local
councils that had been constituted in 1979 and urged their
members to avoid affiliation with political parties. Although a far
cry from the Basic Democracies system of Ayub Khan, the local
councils were given the opportunity to voice their concerns at the
national level through connections with the Majlis-i-Shura. Here
too Zia found sufficient numbers to serve on the councils, and
despite the sustained criticism, the local bodies, with assistance
from the bureaucracy, assumed responsibility for village agricul-
ture, religious training, health, and sanitation.

Zia also ordered the creation of the Shariat Courts. Although
these religious courts did not replace the existing secular court
system, a Federal Shariat Court was established in Islamabad,
not far from the country’s Supreme Court. Its responsibility was
described as safeguarding Islamic precepts and principles. The
religious courts were supposed to formalize an Islamic legal
system and to give it parallel importance to the conventional
secular courts. Zia, however, went further than that with the
Hudood Ordinance that placed emphasis on Islamic codes of
behavior. Crimes against Islam or hadd included imbibing
alcoholic beverages, attending houses of ill repute, and any form
of gambling. Severe punishments were forecast for those found
guilty of neglecting religious duties. Zia admonished would-be law
breakers that they had best find escape in prayer and constructive



Islamization 185

social acts. Numerous individuals nevertheless suffered the
severity of Islamic law. Pictures of public lashings were flashed
around the world and it did not take long to convey the message
that Pakistan had entered a new phase in its history. Moreover,
adverse international reaction could not be avoided, and Islamic
legal codes calling for corporal punishment, that is, the cutting off
of limbs for theft, or stoning for adultery, were either held in
abeyance or imposed sparingly. No hesitation was manifested
in the case of murder convictions, however, and Bhutto’s hanging
was a reminder, as Zia had declared, that Islamic justice would be
done.

Zia also pressed for the implementation of zakat, the Islamic
requirement that Muslims share their wealth with the poor. Zakat
collection was formalized and an Administrator-General who
reported to the President was appointed to oversee the program.
Shiite Muslim opposition to zakat, however, forced Zia to
acknowledge sectarian differences in the collection and distribution
of charitable contributions. The Shiite community therefore was
exempted from the practice. Zia’s willingness to treat the Shiites
differently was not well received by members of the majority
Sunni community. Interpreting Zia’s retreat as a sign of indecision
and weakness, Sunni extremists vehemently protested against the
action. The ruling junta was no less disturbed, fearing Zia’s
decision would bring into question the whole issue of military
governance. More immediately, Zia’s ambivalence fueled the
latent antagonism between Sunnis and Shiites, and Karachi
became the venue for a series of sectarian riots.

The loss of life and destruction of property in this clash over
rival religious practices highlighted the difficulty of implementing
Islamic reforms. The government’s difficulty in quelling the
disturbances provoked a national debate about the wisdom of
too much Islamization. The opposition politicians condemned
Islamization as too little to do with Islamic practice and too much
to do with guaranteeing Zia’s hold on power. Zia was pressured as
never before to defend his policies. At the same time he insisted on
the rigorous enforcement of law and order. All kinds of public
gatherings were banned, curfews were imposed in major
metropolitan areas, and hundreds, some insisted thousands, were
arrested. Zia was forced to broadcast to the nation that his



186 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

government would not tolerate insurrection and that all violations
of the peace would be punished.

Zia was adamant on the need to sustain Islamization, but at the
same time he indicated a desire to consolidate what had already
been achieved. Commenting on the paucity of Islamic scholars to
fill positions in the Shariat Courts, he cited the recently enacted
Qazi Courts Ordinance that attached religious judges to the local
councils system. Reluctant to import experts in Islamic law from
other Muslim countries, Zia called for the expansion of the
country’s madrassahs and declared his government would increase
their funding in order to meet the heavy need. Zia found Saudi
Arabia eager to assist in this effort to train more religious scholars.
The Saudis, who were already committed to assisting the Afghan
refugees, raised their contribution to expand Islamic religious
schools for Pakistanis as well. Madrassahs multiplied all over the
country and the more fundamentalist orders took the lead in
ministering to young people who otherwise had little educational
opportunity.

This was a critical period for Pakistan and the wider region. The
Kashmir dispute, despite Bhutto’s attempt at reconciliation,
remained unresolved. Moreover, there were indications that the
more militant Islamic organizations, emboldened by Zia’s
Islamization program, were organizing clandestine forces for a
more concerted drive in the Vale. Furthermore, units in the
Pakistan army and the ISI were prepared to aid and abet actions
against Indian installations in Kashmir. Tensions between Pakistan
and India therefore began to rise yet again. Indian intelligence
units from RAW reported this intensified Pakistani activity and
New Delhi signaled its intention to resist any campaign of violence
when it began reinforcing its garrison in the region. Meanwhile,
Pakistan was deeply committed in Afghanistan and the only hope
for relief there was the work of the United Nations mediator, who
continued to meet with both Pakistani and Afghan officials in
Geneva. Otherwise the war continued to take its heavy toll and
Pakistan’s border communities could not be protected from
actions spilling across the frontier. And then there was the war
between Iran and Iraq that had erupted in 1980 and showed no
sign of ending. With stalemate on the frontlines, Saddam Hussain
had called upon Iran to cease fire, but Ayatollah Khomeini had



Islamization 187

labeled the Iraqi leader the “Little Satan” (“Great Satan” was
reserved for the United States) and the conflict raged on. Pakistan
led the Organization of the Islamic Conference in trying to
moderate the dispute but both sides were locked in a ferocious
demonstration of violence that refused to yield to diplomacy.

Through all these troubles, Zia had maintained a steady hand
and though vilified as a dictator and ambitious seeker of power he
nevertheless sustained his command of the army and the other
services. He also had won the favor of the more conservative
members of the political community, but that relationship rested
on less stable ground. Zia’s establishment of a wafaqi mohtasib or
national ombudsman was an attempt to demonstrate his liberal
Islamic credentials. The ombudsman, a prominent and respected
jurist in the secular tradition, was given responsibility for
investigating, redressing, and rectifying injustices committed
against citizens by any government agency, except the courts and
the judicial tribunals and commissions established by law. Giving
the ombudsman a substantial budget and a secretariat, Zia let it be
known he was serious about the dispensation of justice in all its
forms. Although insistent that he had no intention of reversing
Islamization, in 1985 Zia’s hedging was more in evidence. The
General-President surprised his compatriots when he declared he
was prepared to dissolve the Majlis-i-Shura and begin the process
of restoring conventional legislatures at the center as well as in the
provinces. Holding to the belief that a strong executive was still an
absolute requirement, he indicated the President would be elected
by a combined vote of the newly constituted legislatures and
would perform the duties of head of government as well as those
of head of state.

Zia’s objective was to preserve the 1973 constitution, but to
amend it to meet his overall need for maximum power. The
President would be the holder of absolute powers and would share
nothing with the Prime Minister, who served at his pleasure.
Having laid the groundwork and now assured that the constitution
favored his indefinite continuance in office, in March 1985 Zia
announced the holding of national elections. He also declared that
martial law, in effect since 1977, would be lifted after the elections
but that the armed forces would remain on station to oversee the
transition to civilian government. The scheduled elections,



188 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

however, were to be conducted without involving the political
parties. Citing again the conflict between political party actions
and Islamic practices, Zia reiterated his belief that the elections
should not become the playground of opportunistic politicians.
Pakistan, he opined, was an island surrounded by a sea of chaos.
This was the moment for all Pakistanis to band together to meet
the challenge that destiny had imposed upon them.

Zia’s plea was hardly meant to placate his detractors, however.
Observing how the President had amassed power, the opposition
again took to the streets. Describing the country as a personal
dictatorship, they denounced Zia as a charlatan and cunning
despot who needed to be deposed. Apparently unprepared for the
intensity of the campaign directed against him, and pressured by
the Americans, who again had become a major actor in the
Pakistan drama, Zia continued to retreat from his earlier more
defiant stand.

Without prior warning Zia revealed he had been rethinking his
opposition to political parties and was giving thought to an
election that could possibly include limited and controlled party
participation. If followed through on, the new plan would open a
contest between the political factions, and the religious parties
could not be expected to win. More important, they were likely to
lose much of the leverage gained since the imposition of martial
law. Moreover, whereas the conventional secular parties had been
largely paralyzed by martial law, the Islamist parties had continued
to function through non-governmental organizations. They tended
to the masses by dispensing information and, more specifically, by
meeting some of the material needs of the urban poor. These
proselytizing efforts would be threatened by any introduction of
traditional political party activity. Islamist parties simply could
not compete with the more secular organizations and they were
appalled that the President would backtrack on the Islamization
program. The fundamentalists therefore vehemently rejected Zia’s
plan to reinstate the secular parties. The Jamaat-i-Islami had the
most to lose, given its growth since Bhutto’s removal. Attractive to
young people, the Jamaat’s student organization, the Jamiat-i-
Tulaba, had developed a prominent place in society. As guardians
of the Jamaat cause, they were now ordered to raise havoc in the
country.



Islamization 189

The intensity of the clash between the students and government
was unanticipated. So too were its widespread character and the
numbers involved. More than a thousand students were arrested as
riots erupted in all of Pakistan’s major cities. The government was
forced to close all the universities and colleges, thus forcing more
students into the streets. Nor was the unrest confined to the student
community. All the more conservative Islamist parties broke ranks
with General Zia. The Jamaat-i-Islami and the Jamiatul-Ulema-i-
Pakistan were among the more critical of Zia’s new thinking. In a
desperate attempt to stem the tide of Islamist ire, Zia ordered the
imprisonment of the conventional politicians he had just ordered
released. He also hoped to placate the Islamists by issuing a decree
depriving the Ahmediyya community, decertified as Muslims
during the Bhutto administration, from using any Islamic symbols
in describing their faith. The Islamists, however, were hardly
appeased. They now insisted the government declare all Ahmediyya
heretics, a charge that would subject them to the death penalty.
Zia ignored that demand but he could not ignore a renewal of
Sunni–Shiite violence in Karachi which again brought the city to a
standstill and caused numerous casualties.

Zia also had to contend with an alleged army plot to overthrow
the government. The soldiers implicated in this conspiracy were
said to have been inspired by Indian and Libyan agents. Moreover,
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto’s two sons had formed a terrorist organization
known as Al-Zulfikar, basing their operations in Libya. The
brothers were tried in absentia for the murder of a Pakistani
diplomat and it did not take a great deal of imagination to link
them with the army plotters. Threats on Zia’s life arose from
several quarters, not the least of which emanated from Afghanistan,
where the KGB and the Afghan KHAD were both believed to be
planning his assassination. Zia, however, insisted he had little to
fear. Before holding elections for the new national assembly, Zia
asked for a popular vote of confidence in his administration. The
referendum, however, asked the people to vote for or against the
Islamization program. A vote in favor would be considered a vote
for Zia; it would also extend his term another five years. Zia of
course succeeded. The public voted overwhelmingly for Islamiza-
tion, but Zia’s critics described the President’s action as a sham
aimed at boosting his legitimacy.



190 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

The President’s unpopularity was expressed in the National
Assembly election when few people answered the call to vote.
Nevertheless, there were still surprises. The voters embarrassed
the General and his government by denying seats to a majority of
his candidates. Although the President’s power and status were
unaffected, only two of nine cabinet-level officials were successful.
Voters also rejected thirty candidates running for positions in the
Assembly on the administration platform. The new legislature
replaced the Majlis-i-Shura but it was no less an advisory body
than the previous one. Zia had had the 1973 constitution amended
so that even the courts could not question his extraordinary and
arbitrary powers. All the martial law edicts and ordinances were
declared constitutional and would remain in place after the lifting
of martial law. Finally, future amendments to the constitution
were made more difficult, thus ensuring there would be no
challenge to the executive institution.

Zia chose Mohammad Khan Junejo, a mild-mannered Sindhi, to
be his Prime Minister, knowing full well the office could not
challenge his authority. Junejo’s selection was aimed at gaining
support in beleaguered Sindh province, the scene of so much
mayhem since Bhutto’s execution. The appointment was also
meant to win supporters from among the Pakistan People’s Party,
now led by Benazir Bhutto, the daughter of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.
Benazir was Zia’s most ardent and vocal critic and, although held
under house arrest during the early years of martial law, she had
been set free to go abroad, where she continued her verbal assaults
against the regime. Junejo, it was hoped, would help reduce Sindhi
bitterness and possibly dampen Benazir’s campaign against the
President. But if that was Zia’s expectation it was not to be
fulfilled. Junejo refused to be a rubber stamp. The Prime Minister
publicly called for the immediate lifting of martial law. He also
insisted on the reinstatement of the banned political parties and
the freeing of all politicians. Zia expected as much from his chosen
Prime Minister, and the alacrity with which he responded to
Junejo’s requests indicated he was prepared to take the necessary
action. New Islamization programs were placed on hold as the
more secular dimensions of the Pakistan condition were energized.
An “indemnity bill”, however, was rushed through the Assembly,
sanctioning all acts of the military government during martial law.



Islamization 191

As more familiar forms of politics gained prominence, reports
reached Pakistan that Shahnawaz Bhutto had been found dead in
his Cannes apartment on the French Riviera. Although rumors
circulated that Zia’s ISI had had him killed, later investigation
revealed his wife had murdered him. Benazir asked Zia to permit
her brother’s body to be returned to Pakistan for burial next to her
father. Not only was she granted her request, she also was
permitted to accompany the body. Her return to Pakistan brought
thousands of her supporters into the streets and she was heralded
as the true heir and leader of the Pakistan People’s Party. Although
ostensibly in mourning, Benazir did not allow the opportunity to
attack Zia to pass her by. However, the intensity of her verbal
assault and the raucous behavior it engendered among her
followers forced the government to re-arrest her. Imprisonment
for political activity is a given in Pakistan and it certainly did not
reduce Benazir’s stature or the role she played in helping restore
the country’s political dynamics. With Benazir a looming presence,
there was no way Zia could avoid his infamous “hangman”
reputation, nor was he in position to win adherents. Zia received
little credit for restoring the political debate because it was he who
had prevented it for almost eight years. The President, however,
had had enough of Benazir. After three months of house arrest, she
was placed on a plane for London, where she resumed her exile.
Back in England, Benazir had many admirers, especially among
the expatriate community, and she immediately launched her drive
to win the favor of disgruntled Pakistanis abroad as well as in
Pakistan.

Martial law ended in December 1985, the longest period of
direct military rule in the nation’s history. Zia’s presidential tenure
was confirmed till 1990, and the National Assembly assented to
all the laws the administration had laid before it. In January 1986
political parties were ordered to register with the Election
Commission and permission to establish a party had to pass the
test of national unity. Parties also had to demonstrate support for
Zia’s Islamization program. With political parties sanctioned,
Junejo linked forces with the Pagaro Muslim League, and, almost
immediately, two-thirds of National Assembly members also
signed on. The Pagaro Muslim League claimed lineage back to the
original pre-independence Muslim League and no other party was



192 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

permitted to bear the name “Muslim League.” Junejo became the
party’s president and Zia quickly answered his request to replace
the serving generals performing as governors of the different
provinces with civilians. Zia associated himself with the Muslim
League, and, believing he held a winning hand, he permitted
Benazir Bhutto to return to Pakistan. Benazir’s arrival, however,
brought even more thousands of supporters into the streets and
she responded to them by declaring her mission the removal of Zia
ul-Haq and the restoration of democracy. The opposition then
formed the Awami (People’s) Movement and selected Benazir as
their leader. Her appearance in Karachi on April 10, 1986
produced crowds not seen since the days of the Quaid-i-Azam.
Recognizing a tide of support in her favor, Benazir reserved all her
criticism for President Zia and said nothing about Junejo or the
Muslim League. Using a strategy that was intended to isolate the
President, the daughter of the martyred Zulfikar Ali Bhutto
anticipated putting together a political coalition that would
guarantee her success in the forthcoming election.

The government, however, was hardly in retreat. The National
Assembly passed legislation making Islam the supreme law. It also
formally established the religious courts. The government also
profited from the revival of the American assistance program. The
Reagan administration acknowledged Pakistan’s frontline status
following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and aid was extended
that would total more than seven billion dollars by the time Ronald
Reagan left office. Given the nature of the war in Afghanistan, the
Americans put aside their differences with Zia over the sacking of
the U.S. embassy in 1979. The latter event had caused the death
of four embassy officials and given Washington ample cause to
lower its profile in the Muslim country. Strains in the relationship,
however, were conveniently forgotten after Moscow ordered its
forces into Afghanistan. Pakistan again became an intimate ally
and the recipient of American arms shipments. The American
embargo, in place since 1965, was officially terminated and
Islamabad was heralded as a close and valuable partner in the cold
war. Pakistan also received more than two billion dollars from the
Asian Development Bank. Together these huge transfers produced
improvements in the country’s economy and helped re-equip the
Pakistan armed forces.



Islamization 193

The war in Afghanistan, however, was a costly venture on many
fronts. Pakistan had to find the resources to meet the basic needs
of more than three million Afghan refugees. The country could not
prevent the war from spilling over its frontier, and Pakistanis
became casualties of the war as a consequence of random
bombing and shelling of villages stretched along the border.
Islamabad engaged in heated exchanges with Moscow, each
accusing the other of fomenting clandestine operations and
indiscriminate assaults on defenseless non-belligerents. Pakistan
also became a thorn in the side of the Soviets by initiating annual
resolutions in the United Nations General Assembly that
condemned Moscow for its operations in the neighboring state.
Each vote overwhelmingly supported the Pakistani position and,
through not successful in forcing a Soviet retreat, they had
considerable propaganda value. Pakistan also was one of the two
parties participating in the U.N.-mediated peace conferences in
Geneva. Through tedious endeavor, Pakistan’s patient diplomacy
held out the hope of a negotiated settlement. In April 1988 an
agreement was achieved and a date for a Soviet pullout from
Afghanistan was approved. Zia took credit for these developments,
and he also tried to achieve understanding between Iraq and Iran
and to end the hostilities between the two countries. Although
unsuccessful, the effort was not lost on those who previously had
been reluctant to credit the Pakistani President with diplomatic
skills.

Despite these achievements, Pakistan was hardly a peaceful
nation. Terrorism was a rising phenomenon and Afghan-related
bombings rocked the country’s major cities from Peshawar to
Karachi during this period. Fighting also broke out in Karachi
between long-resident Pashtuns and members of the mohajir
community. Into this conflict came Afghan refugees who had
migrated from the frontier area to the port of Karachi and were
especially active in the narcotics and gun-running trade. And if the
authorities did not have difficulties enough, they also had to
manage sectarian strife that periodically erupted between Shiites
and Sunnis, between radical students and the police, and between
Muslims and members of the small minority communities. The
fact that gross domestic product increased during 1984–86 could
only be attributed to the heavy role of foreign assistance, and, to



194 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

some extent, to favorable weather conditions that helped increase
the production of rice and cotton.

Benazir and her colleagues, however, ignored the positive and
accentuated only the negative. The government’s failure to
maintain law and order – to reduce the level of violence, or to
stem acts of terror – was blamed on an inept and corrupt
administration. On July 5, 1987 Zia celebrated ten years in power.
The opposition, however, described the moment as “Black Day”
and continued to harass the authorities for their failure to bring
true peace to the nation. The bombing of the Lahore Central Train
and Bus Station on that very day punctuated the politicians’
complaint. Aweek later Lahore’s main bazaar was bombed, so too
the Central Bus Station in Karachi. The dead and injured were
counted in the hundreds, but the perpetrators, who were accused
of working with the Indian RAWor the Afghan KHAD, were more
difficult to identify. The victims of terrorist attacks were largely
innocent members of the population, but the target, it was all too
clear, was the Zia ul-Haq regime. The administration’s ineffec-
tiveness in confronting the challenge, its failure to protect the
population, raised questions about its viability and played into the
hands of the opposition. A loss of popular confidence in the
government could only redound to the benefit of those seeking its
removal.

Terrorists had demonstrated they could strike at will, at targets
of their choosing, and the government found that a counter-strike
was difficult if the perpetrators could not be identified. The enemy
was invisible and the government’s countermeasures were futile.
Some of Zia’s critics found reason to believe that religious
fundamentalists were behind much of the mayhem. Zia’s
Islamization program had energized the Islamists and they would
find fault with anything more likely to enhance the power of the
President than promote the creation of the true Islamic state. To
that extent, the Islamists found themselves in league with more
secular politicians who also derided Islamization as a charade
intended to cover Zia’s grab for absolute power. Islamization, it
was repeated, had unleashed the forces of disintegration, not
integration, and had divided rather than unified the country.

Zia’s counter-argument was that he was protecting Islam
against atheist Marxism, but his detractors refused to accept it.



Islamization 195

Strong in the belief that India and the Soviet Union were
conspiring to destroy Pakistan, Zia cited the Treaty of Friendship
and Cooperation that those two countries entered into in 1971.
The Red Army invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 was a vital part of
a scenario to squeeze Pakistan from two sides. As if to confirm this
perception, in 1986 New Delhi massed troops on the Pakistani
frontier after claiming Islamist insurgents, encouraged by Zia’s
Islamization policies, had raised the level of violence in Kashmir.
Pakistan answered the Indian build-up by rushing its forces to the
eastern border. Hostilities between the two countries seemed
imminent, when Zia surprised even his own government by
suddenly flying to New Delhi. After meeting with Prime Minister
Rajiv Gandhi, who had succeeded his mother following her
assassination in 1984, the two leaders announced the mutual
withdrawal of their troops. The event, described as “cricket
diplomacy,” because Zia was said to be en route to a cricket
match, revealed once again Zia’s flair for diplomacy.

But if the General anticipated credit for averting another war, it
was not to be. Instead, the opposition politicians criticized him for
creating the tension. More significant, however, was the complaint
rumored from the ISI that Zia’s intervention had ruined a
clandestine campaign in Kashmir, exposed Pakistani agents, and
put an insurgent force at considerable risk. The ISI had been
granted a degree of independence not equaled by any other branch
of the armed services, nor was it always subject to constraints
imposed by the President. Zia’s actions raised questions about his
commitment to the Kashmir problem and how Kashmir related to
Islamization. With the ISI having come under the influence of the
Islamists, Zia’s credentials as an Islamic reformer were brought
into serious question. Zia therefore not only had to concern
himself with his enemies in the political opposition, the Soviet
Union and India, and the Afghan KHAD, but also had to confront
the first serious divisions within the armed forces since his
takeover.

In September 1987, however, Indian forces were again activated
when fighting flared anew on the Kashmir front. Pakistani forces,
directed in major part by the ISI, skirmished with Indian troops on
the remote Siachen Glacier. From Siachen, Pakistani forces were in
position to deny Indian troops in Kashmir a vital supply line, and



196 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Pakistani intelligence secretly maneuvered its forces to thwart an
Indian response. India, however, was not unaware of the action
and rushed mountain troops into position to counter the action.
Although New Delhi condemned Zia for breaking his non-
aggression understanding with Rajiv, there was no evidence to
indicate Zia had ordered the maneuver. Rather, information was
circulated that the campaign had been launched to embarrass Zia
and to destroy his “cricket diplomacy” initiative. Islamabad tried
to play down the incident, and Zia was under pressure to remain
silent about his complicity in the Siachen episode, but the loss of
150 Pakistani soldiers in the incident could not be concealed or
obfuscated. New Delhi saw the action as destroying what little
trust had been built between the two leaders. Moreover, India
perceived more Pakistani aggressiveness on its western border.
Islamabad was accused of fomenting disorder in the Indian Punjab,
where it allegedly assisted Sikh separatists in perpetrating acts of
terror against Indian authority. Sikh separatists had pressured
India to give self-determination to the Sikh nation, and New Delhi
had acted to crush what it considered an insurrection. Expressed
Pakistani sympathies for the Sikhs, along with India’s charge that
Islamabad had provided sanctuary, arms, and training to the Sikh
dissidents, all but closed the diplomatic window Zia had opened
earlier.

Pakistan declared it had no interest in fueling India’s Sikh
problem, but it nevertheless accused New Delhi’s RAW intelligence
unit of aiding and abetting terrorist actions inside Pakistan. It was
rumored that neither the Indian Prime Minister nor the Pakistani
President controlled their operational intelligence units. Each
clandestine organization enjoyed privileges that government
officials were hard put to deny. It is doubtful that Rajiv directed
RAW attacks on urban targets inside Pakistan, and Zia’s power
did not extend to controling the operations of the ISI. Zia’s ability
to stop secret operations had diminished with the intensification of
the war in Afghanistan. Only ISI forces could be used against
Soviet troops, because anything else would place Pakistan in direct
confrontation with the Kremlin. Technically, Pakistan was not at
war with the Soviet Union, and Moscow too was disinclined to
declare war on Pakistan. As a secret and indirect force, the ISI also
was free from the normal constraints imposed by the chain of



Islamization 197

command. Moreover, the success of the ISI in linking up with, and
to a large extent directing, Afghan resistance forces placed them
beyond the reach of General Zia. Emboldened by this autonomy,
the ISI saw no reason why it could not apply the same tactics in
Kashmir. If the Soviet superpower could be humbled, the Indian
behemoth could also be compelled to seek a compromise solution
on its outstanding differences with Pakistan. This is not to say that
Zia was not fully apprised of ISI actions, it is simply to
acknowledge that the army’s chief intelligence unit had reason
to gloat over its apparent success in Afghanistan and saw no reason
to desist in its campaign against India. Moreover, the ISI had its
supporters within the armed forces, especially at the highest levels.

Zia had been in power long enough to see the retirement of
most of those officers who had originally sanctioned his policies.
A new generation of officers had taken the reins of leadership and
they were more inured in the tradition of Islamization, more
accepting of Islamist orders, and more serious about Pakistan’s
metamorphosis as an Islamic state. Zia had pursued the goal of
Islamization and although he had met considerable resistance
there was little doubt he had transformed Pakistan. Zia was still
commander of the Pakistan armed forces but his hold on power
had diminished and the army in particular had developed a
momentum that Zia did not control. Yet another factor in the
changing power balance in Pakistan was the army’s pursuit of
nuclear weapons. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto had made the original call
for an “Islamic bomb,” but it was during Zia’s tenure that the
project received particular attention. By 1987, Pakistan had
moved closer to its goal. Islamabad had refused to sign the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, as had India, and it was
common knowledge that the two countries had followed a similar
course in their pursuit of nuclear science. India of course had
detonated a nuclear device in 1974, and since then had worked to
build an effective weapon and the delivery systems for its use. Nor
was Pakistan idle, or uninformed about the Indian program.

Under the cover of the Afghan war, the Pakistan government
circumvented United States laws that denied assistance to a
country engaged in the development of nuclear weapons. The
Reagan administration year after year waived this legislation in
order to service the Pakistan/Afghan resistance. Moreover, the



198 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

United States sold advance fighter-bomber aircraft to Pakistan.
Such aircraft, it was acknowledged, could have nuclear weapons
delivery capability. India beseeched Washington to forgo such
transfers, but the plea was ignored while the Red Army remained
in Afghanistan. In September 1987, a phalanx of Congressmen
called upon the Reagan administration to reconsider its policies
toward Pakistan, but the President ignored their entreaties and the
assistance program remained in place. In the meantime, Pakistan
continued its quest for nuclear weapons.

The end of the Zia era

On entering his eleventh year in power, Zia surpassed Ayub in
political longevity. Zia’s capacity for survival was remarkable, but
Pakistan remained a troubled country, divided along ethnic,
regional, and ideological lines. Zia’s legacy was lengthy and
complicated but it added up to a nation that had yet to construct a
civil society, to express its true identity, or to chart a peaceful
future. Zia had unleashed the Islamists but he had failed to
provide the country with the conditions necessary to construct a
viable political process. Statistically, Pakistan’s economy had
shown measured success, but the general population remained
mired in poverty, undereducated, and hopelessly in conflict with
itself. There were hints of success against the Soviet Union in
Afghanistan, but the political aftermath in that ravaged country
was yet to be determined. Tensions with India had intensified
during Zia’s tenure and the General-President, despite his personal
desire to avoid war with his larger neighbor, could not impart his
concerns to those under his command. The humiliation suffered
by the Pakistan army in 1971 remained to be addressed and there
was little doubt that after Zia more concerted efforts would be
made by many of the senior officers to remedy that wound. Zia
had managed power effectively but by 1988 the forces that
sustained him appeared less keen to do so. The list of those who
wanted him out of the picture had grown substantially.

Sindhh province and most notably Karachi had become a
cauldron of discontent. Conflicting forces included both religious
and ethnic affiliations. Pakistan’s eagerness to become a nuclear
power was more than matched by its enthusiasm for internecine



Islamization 199

bloodletting. Karachi had been transformed into one of the
world’s terror capitals during the tenure of Zia ul-Haq and
numerous organizations were spawned there, virtually all of them
with violence in their soul and unforgiving hatred in their heart.
The Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM) was formed there in
1986 by a young scion of the original refugee community that
flooded the region in the aftermath of independence. Never
allowed to blend into the Sindh community, or to urge upon the
indigenous population the need to fully embrace the idea of
Pakistan, these refugees were joined by still others fleeing East
Bengal in the midst of the civil war. Unaffiliated with the Afghan
refugees who had no likelihood of adopting Pakistani citizenship,
the refugees from the east had built Karachi into the commercial
port city it had become. Resentment rather than grateful
acceptance, however, was their reward. Because of their different
background, their non-Sindhi culture, and most of all their
domination of the region’s economy, the fact that they shared
the Islamic faith was of no importance to those who felt displaced
by the more aggressive carpetbaggers. Sindhi nationalism was a
product of this clash and the Zia government could neither bring
peace to the area nor prevent the rivals from ruining Sindh’s
economy.

Sindh province was not the only region gripped by violence.
Even in the remote mountain area of Gilgit sectarian strife took its
toll of the innocent. Allama Arif al-Hussaini, a leader of the Shiite
community in Gilgit, was murdered in Peshawar in an obvious act
of revenge for the killing of Sunnis. Bombings and assassinations
were commonplace and could be expected virtually anywhere in
the country, especially in Peshawar, Lahore, and Karachi, but no
less so in Faisalabad, Hyderabad, and Bahawalpur. In many
instances the army was called in to calm the situation, to tend
to the dead and wounded, to repair the damage, and most of all to
trace the perpetrators of these acts. Dragnets swept up scores,
hundreds, even thousands, but the mayhem continued. With the
administration under severe pressure, with Prime Minister Junejo
less and less comfortable with his connection to the President, with
the conventional political parties sustaining their condemnation in
one public demonstration after another, Zia found it difficult to
maneuver or impress upon those around him that he controlled



200 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

events. Releasing Junejo from his office for what he described as
his opposition to Islamization, the President again tried to impress
upon his colleagues that he could not be shaken in his resolve to
transform Pakistan into a chaste Muslim nation. Junejo’s
dismissal, however, was seen as a sign more of weakness than of
strength. Zia had grown desperate and more obviously frustrated.

Even the revelation on April 14, 1988 that Pakistan and
Afghanistan had entered into a United Nations orchestrated
agreement, and that the Soviet Union had pledged to remove its
troops from Afghanistan did not bring Zia the anticipated rewards.
The long war in Afghanistan had transformed the new Pakistan
into an entity that could not have been forecast at the time of the
1971 civil war and the loss of the eastern province. Pakistan was
very different from the Pakistan of 1947, and appeared more
devoted to its religious heritage, but it was hardly a polity unified
in its search for a coherent destiny. Zia believed he had the formula
for resurrecting the new Pakistan when he presented his case for
Islamization and then took what he believed were the necessary
steps toward its realization. In the end, however, Zia had done little
if anything to address the major questions burdening his people.
Islam was insufficient to prevent Bengali secession and proved
inadequate to meet the needs of the polyglot and violence-prone
western region. Religious commitment or practice was never at
issue. What hounded and burdened post-civil-war Pakistan was
not religious conviction, but the converting of religious experience
from an act of faith into a weapon. The Islamists were less
identified with the strengthening of spiritual belief than with the
use of Islam as a weapon of massive destruction. Muslims were
told it was only their common monotheistic dedication that made
them the equals if not the betters of those with more sophisticated
economies and more substantial armed forces.

Pakistanis also were impacted by the wars in Afghanistan and
the Gulf. Religious expression ran deep in both wars. Both were
seen as apocalyptic contests between the forces of Allah and those
of secularism. Imbedded in this titanic clash was a choice between
an alien national design and one ordained by the Almighty. Islam’s
proud past beckoned believers to choose between the satanic
forces of neocolonialism and those calling for the Kingdom of
God. The Islamists now preached another form of ideological



Islamization 201

doctrine that emphasized martyrdom and the need for self-sacrifice.
Rejecting the West meant challenging those who would continue
to humble the Islamic world; and it followed from this that those
Muslim leaders who would follow the Western design, whether
politically or economically, were hardly less than apostates and
hence responsible for their own destruction. Zia’s performance as
Pakistan’s head of state had, wittingly or unwittingly, given
substance to this tortured discourse. Pakistan could not escape the
long shadow cast by the Khomeini revolution in Iran and that
nation’s protracted war with Iraq, or the fierce contest of wills that
pitted a primitive fighting force of Afghans against the vast might
of the Soviet superpower. Islam and Muslim sacrifice prevailed in
both struggles. In both situations, success was attributed to an
uncompromising commitment to God’s work.

India was still another reminder that religious obligation
influenced Pakistan’s choice of policies. Kashmir erupted in
renewed conflict in 1988. A veritable intifada challenged Indian
rule in the state as guerrilla units began to shift their operations
from Afghanistan to the former mountain kingdom. New Delhi’s
decision to reinforce its garrison in Kashmir was not unexpected.
Some of the same foreign volunteers who had answered the Afghan
call for assistance now took up the cause of the Muslim Kashmiris.
The promised Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan therefore
brought little assurance that the region would finally be at peace.
Cataclysmic events do not simply come and go, but rather
reverberate long after the initial shock. Epochal change brings in
its wake epochal transformations, and Pakistan was not far from
the epicenter of nothing less than a monumental upheaval.
Pakistanis therefore might have questioned the need to Islamize,
but Muslims they were and Muslims they would remain. It was
never a matter of what design was better or worse for the people
of Pakistan – the secular or the religious – but rather what
structure both satisfied the tenets of faith and met the mundane
needs of a diverse and largely uninformed and malleable society.

The confusion was seen in Zia’s belief that the forces of
secularism were continuing to plot the destruction of his
Islamization program. In June 1988 Zia decreed the implementa-
tion of the Islamic legal code that he declared would become the
supreme law of the land. Superior courts were ordered to strike



202 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

down laws judged to be in conflict with Islamic law. Some
observers suggested that these actions, immediately following
Junejo’s removal from office, were signs of panic, induced in part
by Zia’s awareness that the Soviet retreat from Afghanistan might
expose his Islamization program to increased criticism. Zia lashed
out at Ayub Khan’s 1961 Muslim Family Laws, which were aimed
at protecting the female population of Pakistan. This action,
however, only rallied the more sophisticated women to stand
behind the candidacy of Benazir Bhutto and her Pakistan People’s
Party. Sensing his core beliefs were at risk, his power no longer
supreme, his judgment more in question, Zia called for national
elections to be held on November 16, 1988. Zia was in trouble or
he would never have taken such a step. Moreover, the politicians
certainly understood what they had to do. It was already
determined that the election campaign would center on one issue:
the continuing role of President-General Zia ul-Haq, his policies,
and his style of governance.

Thus there was little celebration and even less relief when the
Soviets agreed to pull their forces out of Afghanistan. Nor would
Zia live to see the moment when the last Soviet soldier departed
Afghan soil. On August 17, 1988, Zia boarded a Pakistan Air
Force C-130 at Bahawalpur for a flight back to Islamabad. Aboard
the aircraft were the American ambassador and most of Pakistan’s
highest-ranking generals. None of them reached their destination.
An explosive device placed aboard the plane detonated when the
craft became airborne. Zia and the others were consumed in the
explosion. The era of Zia ul-Haq had ended amidst the violence
and chaos that had characterized Pakistan from the day the
General seized power in 1977.

Bibliography
Amin, Tahir, Ethno-national Movements of Pakistan: Domestic and

International Factors, Islamabad: Institute of Policy Studies, 1988.
Arnold, Anthony, Afghanistan: The Soviet Invasion in Perspective,

Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 1981.
Binder, Leonard, Religion and Politics in Pakistan, Berkeley: University of

California Press, 1961.
Burki, Shahid Javed and Baxter, Craig, Pakistan under the Military,

Boulder: Westview Press, 1991.



Islamization 203

Chopra, Pran, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto: “If I am Assassinated . . .”, New Delhi:
Vikas, 1979.

Embree, Ainslee, ed., Pakistan’s Western Borderlands: The Transforma-
tion of a Political Order, Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press,
1977.

Farani, M., Tyranny and Justice in Pakistan, Lahore: Idara Mutalia-e-
Tareekh, 1993.

Government of Pakistan, White Paper on Misuse of the Media,
Islamabad, 1978.

Government of Pakistan, White Paper on the Performance of the Bhutto
Regime, Vols. 1–3, Islamabad, 1979.

Griffiths, John C., Afghanistan: Key to a Continent, Boulder: Westview
Press, 1981.

Hammond, Thomas T., Red Flag over Afghanistan: The Communist
Coup, the Soviet Invasion, and the Consequences, Boulder: Westview
Press, 1984.

Hussain, Asaf, Elite Politics in an Ideological State: The Case of Pakistan,
Folkestone: Dawson, 1979.

Inayatullah, Pakistan Politics: A Personal View, Lahore: Ferozsons, 1993.
Mahmood, M. Dilawar, The Judiciary and Politics in Pakistan, Lahore:

Idara Mutalia-e-Tareekh, 1992.
Maluka, Zulfikar Khalid, The Myth of Constitutionalism in Pakistan,

Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Schofield, Victoria, Bhutto: Trial and Execution, London: Cassel, 1979.
Shafat, Saeed, Contemporary Issues in Pakistan Studies, Lahore: Gautam,

1995.
Shahi, Agha, Pakistan’s Security and Foreign Policy, Lahore: Progressive

Publishers, 1988.
Waseem, Mohamaad, Politics and the State in Pakistan, Lahore:

Progressive Publishers, 1989.
Ziring, Lawrence, “Government and Politics,” in Richard F. Nyrop, ed.,

Pakistan: A Country Study, Washington: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1984, pp. 181–256.



7
DEMOCRACY AND HYPOCRISY

No one claimed responsibility for Zia’s death, but it was
reasonable to assume he died at the hands of assassins who had
planned their action with great care and implemented it with even
greater professionalism. The explosion aboard the aircraft was no
accident and the consequences were no doubt more significant than
originally contemplated. The destruction of the plane not only
killed Zia, it also caused the deaths of a young and knowledgeable
American ambassador, the United States Chief Military Attaché,
and virtually all the top generals in the Pakistan army. The
military junta that had managed Pakistan for more than a decade,
suddenly and without prior warning had been blown away. The
political vacuum created by the event was unprecedented. Zia’s
critics were now free to speak their minds. The glee of those who
had opposed Zia drowned out the cries of those who mourned
him. For the opposition, it was a time to set the record straight.
Zia, it was said, had done great damage to the nation and it would
be difficult for succeeding governments to make the necessary
repairs.

Considerable attention was given to what was described as Zia’s
manipulation of the civil and military intelligence agencies, and
the encouragement he gave to militant Islamists in their diverse
ethnic and cultural views. Bhutto had raised his Federal Security
Force, but Zia, in the public view, was the godfather of a host of

204



Democracy and Hypocrisy 205

violence-prone organizations, not the least of which was the Inter-
Services Intelligence Directorate. As much as this argument had
merit, it was also true that Zia, like Bhutto, lost control over those
organizations. Questions remain about how much Zia imposed his
authority on the ISI. Moreover, more was involved than assisting
the mujahiddin in Afghanistan or the clandestine forces in Kashmir.
Zia’s rule, it was argued, his vaunted Islamization program, spoke
more to his desire for absolute power than to his concern for
Pakistan’s welfare. The harshness of the criticism was to be
expected, given the protracted period of political party silence,
and the fact that the politicians had not enjoyed prominence since
the last days of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. But condemn as they did Zia’s
actions, there was no escaping the reality that Pakistan was a
conflict-ridden country and that the impact of Zia’s administration
would be felt well into the future.

Zia’s death did not signify democratic revival in the Pakistani
state. Pakistan has given lip service to democracy and educated
Pakistanis have articulated democratic goals, but Pakistan was not
a democracy at birth, and did not develop into anything resembling
democracy in the decades that followed. By the same token, for all
the talk about Pakistan’s Islamic genius, Pakistan was not at the
outset, or later, anything measuring up to an Islamic state. No
blueprint existed for such an edifice and the distant Islamic past,
most notably the period of the Rashidun or pious Caliphs, which
those opposed to everything secular attempted to reclaim, was
hopelessly beyond reach. The emotional and sentimental musings
of key Islamists gained attention from an unquestioning public,
but even these utopian views barely concealed a play for personal
power.

The question of Islam’s compatibility with democracy has been
analyzed by scholars and laypeople alike, but even if a linkage was
believed to exist, in no way did it measure up to a popular
representation of democratic expression. An act of faith demands
blind obedience, and Islam speaks to the matter of submission, of
personal and collective surrender to God’s will. The key issue was
the concept of sovereignty and the insistence by Muslims, not least
Pakistani Muslims, that sovereignty can be identified only with
God, never with humankind. Hence the delegation of almost
absolute power to the Caliph of old, the declared vicegerent of



206 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

God on earth. God is sovereign and the earthly manifestation of
God’s will is the responsibility of the Caliph, who on God’s behalf
administers to the ummah, the community of believers.

The intertwining of God with notions of sovereignty reinforces
the autocratic tradition. God’s vicegerents are responsible for
insuring that God’s commands are enacted. They are by the same
ordination responsible for protecting His community. The faithful
accept authority unconditionally, because to challenge it is to
challenge God’s message. The tradition extends back to the days
of the third of the pious Caliphs, when Uthman, a member of the
Ummayad clan, reconfigured the Caliphate to satisfy his personal
ends. The more liberal and hence more democratic rule of the first
Caliph, Abu Bakr, and the second, Umar, their emphasis on shura
and consultation, was modified to provide the temporal ruler with
power that could not be challenged. The martyrdom of Ali, the
fourth of the pious Caliphs and the Prophet’s son-in-law, and then
Ali’s son, Hussain, culminated in the establishment of the
Ummayad Caliphate. From that time forward into the modern
era, the Caliph was more the autocratic ruler of a vast dynasty
than the embodiment of Islamic precept. In the absence of a
central Islamic Caliphate, abolished in 1923, lesser caliphs, that is,
Muslim kings and presidents, have assumed absolute power for
themselves and demanded total obedience from their subjects.
From Nasser to Hafiz al-Assad, to Muammar Qadaffi, to Yasser
Arafat, to the Saudi kings, indeed to Jinnah, Ayub, Bhutto, and
Zia there has always been a tradition of lifetime personal rule, not
predictable institutional succession.

Zia’s attempt to resurrect the institution of shura was aimed at
centralizing his authority. He was less interested in introducing
Pakistanis to Islamic democracy. There must be an explanation for
the absolute power sought by Muslim rulers in today’s world.
Clothing actions in the context of salifiyya, or the anticipated
return to a period of “the most righteous,” is meant to make
“legitimate” those who have arbitrarily seized power. Islam may
not ipso facto negate democratic objectives, but from an early
period of the Islamic tradition to the contemporary era, the
executive monopoly of power reveals the believer’s willingness to
submit to autocratic, highly centralized authority, whether
theocratic or secular. Pakistanis are more familiar with regal and



Democracy and Hypocrisy 207

viceregal traditions than with pious rule. Moreover, when
Pakistanis speak of democracy they are less likely to refer to their
religious tradition than they are to express their experience with
secular authority.

Theocracies are alien to the Muslims of South Asia. They also
are undemocratic. Pakistanis are creatures of mixed cultural
experience, and from such a complex milieu the most circumscribed
democratic expression arises. The Muslims of the subcontinent
share an environment with Hindus and Buddhists, Jains, and
Christians, and the nation-state embraces them all. It is in such
conditions that democracy has appeal and is given direction.
Learning to live with diversity is at the heart of the democratic
experience. National republics that seek to be democratic also
strive to become inclusive. Democracy, therefore, is a call to unity,
but it also requires respect for diversity. Democracy is as much a
rejection of exclusivity as it is a struggle against tyranny. Such was
the secular and democratic vision of Mohammad Ali Jinnah.
Vision, however, is ephemeral and no match for reality. Moreover,
with the passage of time, vision fades, or is so transformed that it
is only the weight of history that defines human actions and
influences the future.

Political revival

The army hierarchy suffered a severe blow with Zia’s death. Not
only was Pakistan’s longest-reigning leader gone, so too were the
generals who were likely to have replaced him. The way was open
therefore for civilians, long dormant, to assert themselves. The
Pakistan bureaucracy had known power before but it was now
their lot to fill the breach and to manage the country through the
immediate crisis. An old civil servant, Ghulam Ishaq Khan,
presiding officer in the Pakistan Senate, was quickly sworn in as
Pakistan’s President. With a personal record of service that
spanned the life of the nation, Ishaq was knowledgeable in matters
from finance to defense and therefore an appropriate choice in so
trying a moment. More rational than Ghulam Mohammad and
less ambitious than Iskandar Mirza, Ishaq was no friend of the
politicians but he nevertheless quickly addressed the issue of
civilian government. The new President’s major concern lay not in



208 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

the opportunity for building a democratic nation, but rather in
stabilizing a society torn by ideological as well as cultural and
economic differences. Though advanced in age, he retained
sufficient vitality to assume the powers granted by his new office.
His only limitation was his distance from the army that had been
the essential prop of the Zia administration. Ishaq nonetheless had
the Zia-amended 1973 constitution to rest his authority upon and
knew full well his capacity to force legislative compliance, even if
he had to deal more gingerly with the Pakistan armed forces.

President Ishaq’s first act was the declaration of a state of
emergency. He also played a role in appointing General Mirza
Aslam Baig as the new Chief of the Army Staff (COAS). Baig’s
promotion was a consequence of his not having joined the other
generals on the flight back to Islamabad. Returning on another
aircraft, Baig consulted with General Hamid Gul, Chief of the
Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate. Ishaq’s state of emergency
was attributed to the counsel provided by these two generals and
in the rumor and conspiracy laden Pakistan society, there was
much discussion about the perpetuation of military power. The
formation of an emergency council composed of members of
the armed forces and civilian experts in a variety of fields was
sufficient indication that Ishaq and his powerful colleagues were
not yet ready to announce a full transfer of power to civilian
hands. At this point, however, the courts intervened: the Supreme
Court declared that nothing stood in the way of full political party
activity. President Ishaq did not oppose this juridical finding, in
large part because he was not an Islamist and believed the
conventional political parties would balance the power of the
clerics.

With the Red Army in the process of evacuating Afghanistan,
the matter of dealing with the Communist government in Kabul
and the several Afghan mujahiddin organizations that sought to
remove it was a major concern of the Pakistan army. Long
committed to a solution that would favor the Pakistani cause, the
ISI was in the process of reorganizing the mujahiddin for a final
assault on the Najibullah Communist government. Najibullah,
Babrak Karmal’s replacement, had been left in place by the terms
of the April 1988 U.N.-negotiated agreement. For its part, the
Pakistan government had given its word that it would not interfere



Democracy and Hypocrisy 209

with the Afghan government’s attempt to attract rival muhajiddin
to its side, as well as neutralize those who insisted on contesting its
authority. The ISI, however, never intended to keep that
agreement. Operating, as the ISI always did, behind the scenes,
army intelligence agents penetrated the Pashtun tribes on both
sides of the Durand Line and a strategy was developed that in
short order was expected to end Communist rule in Afghanistan.
Working closely with the Hizb-i-Islami of Hekmatyar, the ISI was
determined to establish Hekmatyar as the leader of the Afghan
government. When the Jamiatul-i-Islami realized what was
happening, their Uzbek and Tajik commanders issued warnings
that they could not allow the more Islamist of the Pashtun
organizations to monopolize power once Najibullah had been
defeated.

Ishaq’s experience as Secretary General in the Ministry of
Defense provided him with an understanding of ISI philosophy
and strategies not known by too many Pakistani civilians. The
President wanted no delays in the Soviet withdrawal but he also
did not want to see Afghanistan transformed into a fundamentalist
Islamic state. Faced with choosing between that result and the
transfer of power to more secular Pakistani politicians, Ishaq
decided on the latter, despite protests from the new army high
command. Ishaq, however, was all the time being second-guessed
by the ISI. Seldom were external events so intertwined with
domestic matters, but, given the power vacuum resulting from
Zia’s death, and conditions that were yet to bring the political
parties back into play, the course of Pakistan’s politics pivoted
around the future of a Soviet-free Afghanistan. So many epoch-
making changes had occurred in so short a time that no one, save
perhaps Ishaq, was in a position to determine the immediate
future.

Coalitions of political parties formed after it was ruled that the
scheduled autumn elections would be held as originally planned.
The Movement for the Restoration of Democracy, the group Ishaq
favored, announced its decision to remain a united front
organization. Its failure to convince Benazir to bring her Pakistan
People’s Party into the movement, however, meant the MRD
would not have the leverage needed to win the election. Arrayed
against the independent PPP was the Islamic Democratic Alliance



210 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

(IDA), which claimed to represent and perpetuate the work of the
late Zia ul-Haq. Attractive to the Islamist orders, the Muslim
League and its IDA coalition early on announced their intention to
sustain their dead mentor’s Islamization program. Ishaq, forever
the secularist, wanted to slow the Islamization process, and even
reverse some of its actions. The formation of the IDA, better
known by its Urdu name, the “Islami Jamhoori Itihad” (IJI),
thwarted that objective. The electoral contest therefore was
between the IJI and the PPP.

All the parties and coalitions presented hastily prepared
manifestos and platforms, the PPP abandoning all references to
Zulfikar’s socialism. Benazir claimed the high ground, projecting a
secular image centered on the vision of a democratic Pakistan. The
IJI on the other hand unabashedly adopted Zia’s policies and
called upon the electorate to help the movement complete the
work that the dead President had begun. The divide not only
separated secularists from fundamentalists; it also left the army on
the side of the IJI and the bureaucracy with the PPP. The army was
already too deeply committed to the Islamists to shift course now.
Too much was at stake in Afghanistan following the Red Army
retreat and the Pakistan army was too committed to the Pashtuns,
including those Pashtuns who made up a large portion of the
Pakistan army. Nor was the army in harmony with the PPP; not
even a PPP led by the American and British educated Benazir
Bhutto. It was the army that had hanged Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, and
the army refused to sanction a government led by another member
of the Bhutto family. Moreover, given the alleged acts of terrorism
perpetrated by Benazir’s brothers against the Zia regime, the PPP
was judged unfit to govern Pakistan.

Ishaq, however, saw the crisis differently. Mindful of the need to
establish stability as quickly as possible and disinclined to see the
army under Aslam Baig again take control of the government,
Ishaq had no alternative but to support the PPP. The election
therefore would be the determining factor. The problem for Ishaq,
however, was that with so many organizations competing for the
parliamentary seats, it was doubtful any group or party would win
a majority. And so it was. With 215 seats contested, the biggest
winner was the PPP, but it won only ninety-two places in the
Assembly. The IJI, despite the work of the Muslim League,



Democracy and Hypocrisy 211

achieved victories in only fifty-four constituencies. Islamist
organizations never demonstrated much prowess at the polls,
but their minority status was never a factor in their capacity to
influence events. Be that as it may, Ghulam Ishaq was called upon
to make a decision. Holding new elections was considered out of
the question. Moreover, new elections might not guarantee any
different result, and might precipitate an army putsch. Also aware
that decisions had to be made with due haste, the Mohajir Qaumi
Movement that dominated Karachi and the Awami National Party
in the NWFP threw in their lot with the PPP. Ishaq now had his
opening. The President called upon Benazir to meet with him, and
shortly after their conversation it was announced that the first
civilian-led government in eleven years was to be formed by a lady
hardly thirty-six years old.

Bhutto insisted democracy was her goal. She called the leader of
the IJI, the Punjabi Nawaz Sharif, and asked him to meet with her.
When they met, the two politicians were said to have achieved a
meeting of the minds: neither wanted the Pakistan army in politics,
and both would center their actions on reducing political rivalries
and improving the economy. That initial understanding, however,
died almost as quickly as it had been established. In her first press
conference Benazir lashed out at Nawaz, who had become Chief
Minister of the Punjab. Calling him a “separatist,” Benazir
reported that Nawaz wanted to undermine her government even
before it had set to its tasks. To check the IJI leader’s strategy, the
Prime Minister made the PPP Secretary General the governor of the
Punjab. She also assigned a number of civil servants to the Punjab
without consulting the Chief Minister. Nawaz interpreted the
maneuver as an attempt to steal his provincial election victory, and
he was reminded that Zulfikar had done similar things in the
NWFP and Balochistan during his tenure. Benazir had signaled a
desire to control all the provinces of Pakistan, especially the
Punjab, considered the most important. Now the gauntlet had been
thrown down, there would be no reconciling the two politicians.

Nawaz Sharif was ready for the struggle and he used all the
leverage at his disposal to defend IJI dominance in the province.
All pretence of democratic practice was ignored or forgotten.
Better at democratic rhetoric, the two major contenders betrayed
in their actions their true intent. Neither truly believed Pakistan



212 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

was ready for a full-blown experiment in parliamentary democracy,
and all their actions and counteractions proved arbitrary and
vindictive. President Ishaq shuddered at the sight of the two
politicians struggling in the public forum. He had gambled that
Benazir’s experience abroad would have tempered her actions, but
her intemperate behavior revealed how wounded she was by her
father’s execution and how closely she resembled the character of
her father, who had shown a total inability to work with people
who disagreed with him. To suggest that Benazir too was touched
by the feudal experience is one explanation for this clash of
personalities; to understand that she felt weakness not strength in
becoming Prime Minister is perhaps more germane. Benazir had
achieved a plurality at the polls, hardly a mandate with which to
govern a troubled and divided nation at a critical time. She knew
she required more authority. She also knew that real power lay with
the chief executive and army high command. Seeing confrontation
not cooperation as the reality shaping her government, she
preferred forcing Nawaz from office rather than trying to
accommodate him.

Ghulam Ishaq was not so much a gray eminence in this battle as
a man caught between two headstrong leaders representing
legacies at total variance from one another. Pakistan’s political
scene was not only infantile, it had been stunted by years of
military dominance. Benazir and Nawaz refused to regard
compromise as a preferred course of action. Ghulam Ishaq could
not impress upon them the need to refrain from baiting one
another or, worse, seeking one another’s demise. The President
therefore shifted his position. No longer able to demonstrate a
preference for Benazir and distressed by the antics of her PPP
supporters, he assumed a more neutral stance, hoping that he
could keep the army from taking matters into its own hands. In
fact the army was already making gestures of its own. General
Baig, never the preferred successor to Zia, demonstrated his
estrangement from the Zia clique by suddenly siding with Benazir.
Baig’s motives were unclear but he was more the conventional
nationalist and had concluded that the tilt in favor of Islamization
had widened fissures in the body politic that could not be closed.
Baig was a disciplinarian with tendencies toward autocratic rule,
but he found the Muslim brotherhood threatening and counter-



Democracy and Hypocrisy 213

productive. Thus he frowned upon the IJI and saw in Nawaz a
mediocre capitalist with false visions of grandeur.

While the Voice of America was describing Benazir as a breath of
fresh air and a “symbol of the new democratic Pakistan,” Benazir
was struggling to ward off a variety of attacks on her government.
Amidst high inflation and deepening unemployment, demands
came from the private sector that she could not address. Nor could
she satisfy her coalition members with her domestic diplomacy in
shambles. Benazir lost the support of the Mohajir, now renamed
Muttehida Qaumi Movement (MQM) as well as the National
Awami Party. Virtual civil war in her native Sind province had
caused her to talk publicly about a “mini-insurgency” and her use
of the army to quell disturbances did not sit well with her
supporters. Calls for an independent Sindhu Desh by the venerable
G.M. Syed did not help the situation. Emboldened, the rioters
defied the army, seized a provincial airport, and burned the
Pakistani flag. Only after launching a large-scale campaign and
arresting several thousand demonstrators did the army bring
matters under control. Undaunted by the army action, however,
separatist organizations sprang up in different areas of Sindh.
Similar acts of violence erupted in Balochistan and the NWFP. The
symphony of secessionist calls illustrated the fragility and essential
weakness of the government in the aftermath of the Soviet
departure from Afghanistan.

The last Soviet soldier left Afghanistan in February 1989, but
the war did not end. Najibullah was entrenched in Kabul and
determined to remain the leader of the Marxist government.
Although the Americans concluded their role in the region had
ended, the ISI was not about to give up the fight until the
Communist government had been replaced and Islamabad had
established its influence over the future Afghanistan. Lieutenant-
General Hamid Gul, the ISI director, had organized a drive on the
important town of Jalalabad, near the Pakistan frontier. Arranged
in conventional military formation, the ISI-led fighters were
soundly defeated by Najibullah’s army and the reverberations of
this failure rippled through Pakistan. Wali Khan, the Awami
National Party leader, accused the ISI of prolonging the conflict
and demanded a cessation of hostilities. The ISI, however, refused
to back away. Hamid Gul, believing General Baig and Benazir



214 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

were conspiring to have him removed, conferred with Nawaz
Sharif and Ghulam Ishaq in an attempt to enlist their services.
Learning of Gul’s cabal, Benazir dismissed him, saying he had
been appointed by Zia in 1987 and had outlived his usefulness.
The ISI had learned a lesson, however. Acknowledging that large
set battles could not be mounted in Afghanistan, the intelligence
unit fell back on small unit operations. Increasing support to the
Hizb-i-Islami of Hekmatyar, it believed it could rally the Pashtun
tribes on both sides of the frontier, seize Kabul, and form the new
Afghan government.

Benazir depended on Baig to keep her informed of ISI secret
operations. But the ISI had grown accustomed to functioning
outside the authority of the regular army, and, given Baig’s
rejection of the Zia system, even he was not informed of the
directorate’s plans. Moreover, Nawaz had inherited Zia’s Muslim
League and through the party he liaised with the special army
units. Somewhat assured that he had army support despite his
falling out with the army commander, Nawaz sustained his attack
on Benazir. In November 1989, a motion of no confidence in the
Benazir administration was brought to a vote in the National
Assembly. Nawaz, along with the IJI, and assisted by the MQM,
led the no-confidence vote; by doing so the Muslim Leaguer hoped
to win the favor of General Baig, but the COAS refused to meet
with him. When the no-confidence motion, the first in the history
of Pakistan, was brought to a vote, Nawaz came up short. Benazir
reveled in her victory but she also accused the IJI of trying to
subvert the neutrality of the armed forces, as well as falsely vilify
her administration. Defiantly, Benazir said her term as Prime
Minister had only just begun and that she had no doubts about her
ability to complete the course.

Benazir’s confidence, however, could not conceal the fact that she
was a woman in a man’s world. The first Muslim woman to assume
high office in a Muslim government, she was not the celebrity in her
own country that she was abroad. The traditional role of women in
Islamic society specified a particular subordination to men. Women
were denied behavior deemed the preserve of men and from the
beginning of her tenure Benazir was hounded by fundamentalists
who questioned her bona fides. The Salman Rushdie episode
exploded upon the Muslim world during this period, setting off



Democracy and Hypocrisy 215

violent displays in several countries, especially in Pakistan.
Rushdie’s Satanic Verses was judged blasphemous by Muslim
clerics, and the Ayatollah Khomeini called upon Muslims every-
where to find and murder the author. A price was put on Rushdie’s
head and for an extended period he was forced into hiding in
Britain. In Pakistan, demonstrations against the publication and
distribution of the book resulted in a number of deaths, but Benazir
was one of a very few Muslim leaders to speak out on the right of
free speech. Finding fault with the Islamists, she said she would
forcefully prevent all displays of anti-social behavior. Defying the
extremists, Benazir defended the author’s creative talents without
endorsing the book. In doing so, she won the favor of members of
Pakistan’s literati. Her call for calm, however, did not quiet
Rushdie’s critics, nor did the event help her administration.

Benazir had come into office with the belief that democracy
would flower under her leadership. It did not take long before that
belief was substituted by another that addressed Pakistan as a
failed state. Benazir continued to speak in the name of democratic
institutions but she clearly had opted for the more arbitrary
powers associated with her predecessors. Moreover, her husband,
Asif Zardari, was a major influence on her political thinking and
he convinced her that in a struggle with no rules attached, one
does whatever is necessary to hold onto power. Machiaveli not
John Locke dominated her governing style and when confronted
with renewed rioting in Karachi in February 1990 she ordered the
army to crack down mercilessly on the killers and destroyers of
property. The frequent use of the army, however, did not redound
to her favor. Nor could she quell the terrorists targeting the
innocent. The bombing of the Karachi bus terminal took many
more innocent lives, and, like all the other incidents before it, the
event weighed heavily on Benazir’s administration.

General Baig tried to convince the Prime Minister that only a
no-holds-barred approach to root out miscreants in the PPP, the
MQM, and the Islamist orders could reverse the wave of terror and
bring peace to the troubled country. But the Prime Minister could
not go along with the scheme, especially one that also included
doing violence to her own party. The Prime Minister’s rejection of
the Baig proposal caused increased distress in the highest army
circles. So too did Benazir’s acceptance of an American request to



216 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

reduce tensions with India by removing army units on the line of
control in Kashmir. The generals met in secret session to discuss
these and other matters burdening the state while Benazir was on
tour in the Middle East. Stopping in Morocco, Algeria, Kuwait,
Bahrain, and Iraq, Benazir had a publicized conversation with
Saddam Hussain just before the invasion of Kuwait on August 2,
1990. Benazir was not informed of Saddam’s intentions. Iraq’s
swift conquest of Kuwait, the termination of its sovereignty, and
its transformation into Iraq’s nineteenth province shocked the
world. It also provoked the United States to take counteraction.
Pakistan was faced with still another crisis and the army
confronted still another concern.

Believing Iraq was making plans to extend its conquest to Saudi
Arabia’s oil fields, Washington called upon the United Nations
Security Council to authorize a defense of the oil-rich kingdom.
“Operation Desert Shield” was the immediate outcome and an
international coalition was quickly assembled to defend the region
from further Iraqi aggression. With Kuwait overrun and Saudi
Arabia threatened, a number of Muslim countries declared their
willingness to participate in the coalition. In Pakistan, Benazir
pondered her move. General Baig had expressed his misgivings
and more so his opposition to United States leadership in a matter
that he believed was a Muslim affair. Benazir took a contrary
position, believing Saddam had betrayed the entire Muslim world
and that the international coalition was the only logical response.
Benazir did not know that a decision had already been taken to
remove her. Just four days following the invasion of Kuwait, on
August 6, the Pakistan army, in collaboration with President
Ishaq, deposed Benazir. Ishaq declared he had used the powers
granted him under the Eighth Amendment and Article 58 (clause b)
of the constitution. The first woman to head a Muslim
government was forced to leave office hardly seventeen months
into her five-year term. The National Assembly was dissolved and
a caretaker government quickly assembled.

Democracy revisited?

Benazir described the President’s actions as unconstitutional and
arbitrary, but the decision could not be rescinded. Ishaq accused



Democracy and Hypocrisy 217

the PPP leaders of corruption and nepotism. Benazir was declared
unfit for office, having failed to stem domestic violence and having
allowed the economy to fall to new depths. She also was threatened
with arrest for misconduct. Her husband was singled out for
judicial assault, in one instance being charged with kidnapping.
It was obvious from the charges that leaders of the coup did not
want Benazir returned to office. She was called before the Lahore
High Court to show cause why she should not be found guilty of
misconduct in matters pertaining to the production of natural gas,
and the dispensing of marketing rights to relatives and friends.
Forced to fight the cases brought against its leaders, the PPP had
little in reserve to run an effective electoral campaign. With the
PPP out of the race, the field was wide open for the IJI and Muslim
League coalition. The IJI manifesto issued on October 13 specified
the party’s central objective as the “supremacy of the Qur’an and
Sunnah.” The IJI wanted it known that not only did it revere Islam
but it was the only genuine people’s party. Exploiting latent anti-
Americanism, it condemned Benazir’s dependence on the United
States and declared it would reappraise the country’s foreign
policy and identify more closely with the Islamic nations.

On October 1, the Bush administration ordered a halt to all
assistance to Pakistan. Benazir’s opposition, however, was not
prepared to yield to American pressure. Arguing the Americans
had used Pakistan’s dependence on U.S. aid to force Ishaq not to
dismiss Benazir, Washington’s embrace of the young female Prime
Minister only provided more ammunition for the political
opposition to use against her. Washington, it was said, expected
Benazir to put a brake on the Pakistan army’s interventionist
behavior and to keep the troops in the barracks. The United States
also looked to Benazir to rein in the Islamists, but that too was not
a popular cause and it also backfired. In retrospect, American
actions provided grist to the anti-American mill, and IJI popularity
rose as the PPP suffered the defection of a number of its stalwarts.
Finally, the Lahore High Court ruled that the President had the
legitimate authority to dissolve the National Assembly and call
new elections. The court cited Benazir’s failure to perform her
legislative responsibilities. It also pointed to her inability to restore
law and order in the country. With the powerful arrayed against
her, Benazir was effectively eliminated as a viable candidate by the



218 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

time the country went to the polls on October 24. The IJI coalition
won the election, much as had been expected. It defeated the PPP
in every province, and when splinter parties later joined its ranks it
controlled 155 National Assembly seats to the PPP’s forty-five.

IJI success at the polls meant Nawaz Sharif was sworn in as the
new Prime Minister of Pakistan. Benazir complained about
fraudulent polling, but her complaint fell on deaf ears. Nawaz
quickly formed a government and Benazir had to content herself
with the leadership of the opposition. Nawaz had been nurtured in
Pakistan’s cosmopolitan setting. A capitalist, his family’s industrial
activities had made him a wealthy man. He also had sufficient
reason to oppose the PPP after Zulfikar Ali Bhutto had
nationalized his father’s property. An ardent believer in free
enterprise, Nawaz criticized the threat to democracy of Bhutto’s
socialist program. Nawaz was also a devout Muslim. Steeped in
Islamic practices, he believed the PPP’s secular posture was a threat
to the evolution of the Pakistani ethos. Nawaz therefore became a
firm supporter of General Zia’s program of Islamic renaissance.

Nawaz Sharif saw no contradiction in being a proper Muslim
while at the same time promoting economic change and his own
material well-being. During Zia’s tenure, Nawaz accepted the
position of Finance Minister in the Punjab government and
achieved notable success. He also became a member of the Muslim
League and was given major responsibility as an organizer and
fundraiser. Quickly rising to a position of political leadership,
Nawaz became an articulate spokesman for the Punjab Muslim
League, and it was not long before he was tipped to be the
province’s Chief Minister. His conflict with Benazir, who
desperately sought to control the Punjab, made Nawaz a national
figure. Moreover, his dedication to the memory of General Zia
stood in sharp contrast to Benazir’s characterization of the dead
President as usurper and despot. By retaining leverage with the
army, Nawaz rode a wave of anti-PPP and anti-Benazir sentiment.
Though declaring his objective was the destruction of feudalism
and the flowering of democracy, the new Prime Minister was more
intent on marrying commerce with religion.

The new National Assembly opened its doors on November 3,
1990. The Prime Minister declared his government would
embrace all who shared the IJI philosophy and wished to work



Democracy and Hypocrisy 219

toward reconciliation and national renewal. Nawaz reached out
to fundamentalists, to ethnic-based organizations, and to members
of the minority communities, insisting they all could find a home
in his coalition. The state of emergency was lifted the very next
day and Nawaz urged the nation to join him in expanding
education, improving national health, putting people back to
work, and generally making life more enjoyable for all Pakistanis.
Nawaz also declared it to be his government’s goal to accelerate
development of the country’s nuclear program. Cautioning that
this did not mean the pursuit of an “Islamic bomb,” the Prime
Minister said he wanted Pakistan to be a modern state and that the
science and technology of the nuclear era were important to
the country’s modernization. Moreover, Pakistan needed sources
of cheap energy to expand its industrial base and improve its
urban infrastructure; only nuclear power, he insisted, would allow
the country to achieve higher growth and greater independence.

The Nawaz formula for democratic and economic development
received a positive and collective response that was unique in the
history of Pakistan. Self-reliance and resource sharing were given
greater emphasis. The government declared its intention to end the
country’s dependence on the United States, and the cut-off of
American assistance was welcome in many quarters. The new
administration called for tax reform, export promotion, and a
vigorous industrial policy. Pakistan, noted Nawaz, wanted good
relations with the United States but it wanted its independence
from foreign influence even more. With the Soviets gone from
Afghanistan, Washington had moved into another mode, and
Pakistan no longer played much of a role in American foreign
policy. Within a very short period, the country had gone from being
the third-highest recipient of American assistance to receiving
almost nothing. Pakistanis were inclined to find connections where
they had common experiences, and even Pakistan’s membership in
the Gulf coalition against Saddam Hussain lacked popular appeal.
A Pakistani troop contingent was sent to Saudi Arabia but its role
was more symbolic than real. Protecting the holy sites of Islam
was the way it was presented to the Pakistani public. General
Baig, on the other hand, was outspoken in expressing the view
that the royal family of Kuwait had outlived its usefulness and that
Pakistan might consider a more appropriate regional policy.



220 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

The Prime Minister had no intention of following Baig’s ideas.
In November 1990 he made a special trip to Riyadh to meet with
the Saudi royal family as well the Emir of Kuwait. Condemning
Iraq’s aggression, the Prime Minister said he would send
additional troops to help defend the area from further assaults.
Nawaz subsequently flew to the Maldives for a meeting of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and
met with India’s new Prime Minister, Chandra Shekhar, who had
succeeded the assassinated Rajiv Gandhi. The two new leaders
addressed the old question of Kashmir, but the Indian Prime
Minister accused Pakistan of instigating a new, more violent
uprising in the troubled state. Nawaz nevertheless insisted on a
resolution to the Kashmir problem, and that it be managed by the
Kashmiris themselves. Calling again for a plebiscite to determine
the future of Kashmir, he was, like those before him, rebuffed by
the Indian leaders. With the war in the Gulf intensifying and the
Indian–Pakistani dispute over Kashmir as far from resolution as
ever, Nawaz deferred to his commanding generals. Their reach
reduced by the cut-off of U.S. military supplies, the military
establishment agreed to maintain a presence in the Gulf but to
avoid any commitment of combat forces. Moreover, the ISI was
authorized to continue operations in Kashmir and Afghanistan,
where efforts to dislodge Najibullah had not yet succeeded.

Nawaz centered attention on economic stability and growth. He
returned confiscated property, held since the Bhutto years, to its
original owners. He tried to assure domestic entrepreneurs that
their investment in Pakistan was appreciated and secure. His
purpose was to rejuvenate the private sector and to balance
industrial expansion with agricultural growth. Rural areas were
made prime targets for agro-based industries, and government
incentives promised Pakistan’s capitalist class high returns. The
government also deregulated the economy, attracted funds secreted
abroad back to the country, and induced a higher performance of
private innovation. Nawaz envisaged a number of reforms in the
methods of taxation, in foreign exchange calculations, and in
administrative law. Nevertheless his program of national renewal
was heavily weighted in favor of the wealthy. The affluent
increased their wealth, but the rank and file saw little improvement
in their standard of living and it did not take long for the



Democracy and Hypocrisy 221

opposition politicians to make an issue of the discrepancies
between promise and fulfillment.

In 1991, an IJI-proposed Shariat Bill became law. The legislation
called for a more rigorous legal system based upon religious
scripture. It also authorized the expansion of the religious schools
and prescribed daily prayer schedules. The law cited the need to
revise the banking system to conform to the tenets of Islam, and
prevented the media from questioning religious expression.
Federal and provincial laws that were deemed repugnant to the
teachings of Islam were declared null and void. The country’s
secular opposition questioned the government’s shift to a more
theocratic posture, but it was the women’s organizations and
minority groups that stimulated more concern. Nawaz was
compelled to publicly state his position on religion, but when he
declared he was not a fundamentalist he brought distress to an
important segment of his constituency.

Nawaz walked a tightrope strung between his business
acquaintances on the one side and the Islamists on the other. He
also was challenged by the “Kalashnikov culture” that permeated
the major cities. Citing the frequent bombings, assassinations, and
kidnappings, he called for a tough stand on law and order issues,
but everyone had heard that before and the public waited to see
whether the Prime Minister really intended to do anything about
the problems. Recognizing citizens were safe neither in their
homes nor in public, Nawaz had to find ways to deal with the
brazen outlaws who took advantage of defenseless people.
Moreover, gun-running and narcotics peddling had reached higher
levels and government officials were implicated in the lucrative but
illicit trade.

The Twelfth Amendment to the constitution approved in the
summer of 1991 called for summary justice and speedy trials of
those found in violation of the law. Serious efforts were launched
to combat the disorder. The violence, however, continued. Nor
could the police cope with the problem. Even the army offered
little more than a brief respite. When more drastic measures were
contemplated to deal with the situation, the critics were always
ready to condemn the government for what was described as the
use of arbitrary powers. Maintaining law and order proved an
impossible task and the administration’s apparent weakness



222 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

opened it to still more criticism. Nawaz’s economic program had
also run into difficulty. Promises were not realized and the plight
of the average citizen was judged as more not less severe than
during the previous administration. It was not too long before the
opposition began referring to Nawaz’s economic scheme as “loot
and plunder.” Economic scandals drew public attention because
of the changes that favored the private sector. Gaining control of
energy-producing installations, telecommunications, and shipping
and airlines operations, private entrepreneurs prioritized the
bottom line, not public welfare. The consequences of these
policies were sharp increases in the cost of basic commodities,
uncontrolled inflation, and incoherent planning. Corruption was
institutionalized in all sectors, including the banking industry and
cooperative societies, in which innocent depositors were said to
have lost their total life’s savings.

What had started out as an impressive new campaign to expand
and modernize the economy had in a year’s time become a failed
and repudiated program. Nawaz took responsibility for the
shortcomings and was forced to admit his inability to transform
vision to reality. He also lost the political trust needed to sustain
his administration. Moreover, given defections from the IJI
coalition government, Benazir, as leader of the opposition, was
again active in leading the assault on the administration. Benazir
sustained her argument that the IJI had stolen the 1990 election.
She also charged the administration with gross inefficiencies as
well as major acts of impropriety. Citing the effort to silence her
and her PPP organization, she accused the government of police
state tactics and seeking to convert Pakistan into a fascist state.

The Afghanistan factor

General Baig had been pressured to retire from the army in August
1991 and the new army commander, General Asif Nawaz, had
assumed the post of COAS. The Gulf war had run its course by
this time and although Saddam remained in power in Baghdad, his
armed forces had suffered heavy losses at the hands of the
American-led coalition. Baig’s anti-monarchy comments in the
course of the war now reverberated in the region and the Prime
Minister hoped his new army commander could smooth over



Democracy and Hypocrisy 223

relations with the Gulf kingdoms, especially with the Kuwaiti
royal family that had been returned to power. General Nawaz also
had a major responsibility in bridging differences with the United
States. The Gorbachev reforms had fizzled out in the Soviet Union,
precipitating a coup that ultimately failed when Soviet army chiefs
refused to go along with the coup plotters. The episode led to an
implosion within the superpower which at the close of 1991
brought the startling end of the once vaunted Communist state.
The Soviet Union broke up as its republics all sought and achieved
their independence. The changes were felt worldwide. In Pakistan
and Afghanistan the reverberations were magnified many times
over.

With the termination of Soviet assistance, Najibullah’s forces
defected, leaving the Communist regime vulnerable on all fronts.
Kabul was surrounded and fell to mujahiddin forces led by
Masud, and Abdul Rashid Dostum, an Uzbek formerly loyal to the
Communist leader in Kabul. On April 16, 1992, Najibullah
surrendered and was placed in United Nations custody pending a
determination of his fate. The swift action of the northern forces
had prevented the implementation of a United Nations plan for a
post-Communist Afghanistan. It also set the scene for a violent
clash between non-Pashtun and Pashtun mujahiddin, especially
those led by the Pakistan ISI. The ISI continued to favor
Hekmatyar, whereas Masud boosted the credentials of Burhanuddin
Rabbani. Dostum on the other hand was more determined to
pursue his own destiny. In the circumstances there would be no
peace for Afghanistan, in large part because Pakistan and its ISI
had a stake in the solution.

The ISI’s original orders were to neutralize Afghan meddling in
Pakistani affairs. From the time of Pakistan’s independence,
Afghan leaders, notably Sadar Mohammad Daud, had called for
the independence of Pakistan’s NWFP, a region Daud referred to
as “Pakhtunistan.” Pakistan had warded off such threats to its
territorial integrity, but during the administration of Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto the issue was raised again. The Afghan government was
accused of aiding secessionist forces in Pakistan, both in the
NWFP and in Balochistan. During the Bhutto years the Pakistan
army had been called to fight a protracted and bloody war in
Balochistan, and Islamabad found enough evidence to cite the



224 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Afghan government as a source of the trouble. The ISI therefore
was infiltrated into Afghanistan to work with Islamist forces
opposed to the Daud regime.

The Islamic movement in Afghanistan had been the work of
Rabbani, Hekmatyar, and others, assisted by Masud, who
assembled a fighting arm for the group. In time these individuals
had attracted a large number of university students, as well as
members of the ulema, and other devotees of Islam. All had
dedicated themselves to the overthrow of Mohammad Daud. Daud,
however, was determined to defeat the Islamists and found himself
more and more in league with the Communists, who also sought his
demise. Confronted by superior power, the Afghan Islamists found
sanctuary in Pakistan, where Bhutto readily provided them with
arms and other assistance. From this time forward, Pakistani
assistance to the Islamists passed through several stages, especially
after the Communist overthrow and the killing of Daud.

Inter-Services Intelligence connections with the Afghan funda-
mentalists were deepened with the Communist revolution in 1978
and the Soviet invasion in 1979. The ISI recognized both the
weakness and potential strength in the Islamist movement in
Afghanistan. Following the Soviet seizure of Kabul and the
subsequent flight of the Afghan opposition leaders to Peshawar,
Pakistan’s army intelligence unit took on its greatest responsibility.
Although the ISI did their best, in the end the ethnic divisions in
Afghanistan could not be bridged. The Pakistanis therefore chose
the Hizb-i-Islami as their principal change instrument in Afghani-
stan. They also developed intimate relations with Hekmatyar and
found his message similar to their own in pressing the war against
the Soviet Red Army. At the same time, the northern forces,
composed mainly of Tajiks and led by Ahmad Shah Masud,
assumed a more secular stance, but nevertheless were just as
determined to rid the country of Communist forces. Rabbani, who
opposed Hekmatyar, allied with Masud and together they formed
yet another front in the war. Moreover, when Najibullah fell in
1992 it was essentially the alliance forged between Masud,
Najibullah’s Afghan generals, and the Uzbek militia leader Abdul
Rashid Dostum that carried the day. The Pakistani ISI and the
major Pashtun force associated with Hekmatyar were forced to
accept a lesser role in the liberation of the Afghan capital.



Democracy and Hypocrisy 225

It was now General Asif Nawaz’s task to play diplomat in
resolving differences between the different mujahiddin organiza-
tions and especially their leaders. Asif, however, had virtually no
control over the ISI and the latter was not interested in a mediated
settlement that left the Tajiks and Uzbeks in a dominant position in
the new Afghan government. Moreover, the outflanked Pashtuns
were not well disposed to the political engineering contemplated by
the Northern Alliance. Northern leaders wanted to operate
independent of the Pakistanis and they were opposed to sustained
Islamabad influence in Afghan affairs. Efforts were made by the
Northern Alliance to signal Islamabad that the Afghans should
have the opportunity to arrive at an unencumbered understanding
largely based upon tribal custom. In the absence of Pakistani
involvement, it was said, Afghans would find common ground,
and Pashtuns, Tajiks, Uzbeks, Hazara, and others would work
through their differences.

The politics of chaos

Nawaz Sharif had little if any leverage in this matter. Nor did
General Asif Nawaz indicate a greater capacity to deal with the
main issues. Rival Afghan factions achieved an accord in
Peshawar that called for a ruling council that represented all the
ethnic groups. They also agreed that Rabbani would become the
head of state, and Sibghatullah Mujaddedi would head the fifty-
member council, composed of thirty field commanders, ten ulema,
and ten officers from the various mujahiddin political parties.
Hekmatyar was to be given the power to select the Prime Minister
from the Hizb-i-Islami and the Deputy Prime Minister was to be
the choice of the National Islamic Front. Ahmad Shah Masud, a
leader of the Jamiat-i-Islami, was to be made Defense Minister.
Although the Peshawar Accord appeared to be a reasonable
compromise on who should govern Afghanistan, it did not conceal
continuing bitterness among the principals and their followers.
Hekmatyar was especially unhappy with Masud’s decision to ally
with Dostum, who was said to have betrayed the Afghans by
having joined with the Communists and Soviets. The choice of
Masud for Defense Minister therefore kept suspicions and
animosities alive. Moreover, the interim government, weighted



226 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

in favor of non-Pashtuns, led the ISI to conclude that only by their
intervention could the rival forces be balanced in a way that
provided Pakistan with greater security.

On January 8, 1993 it was reported that General Asif Nawaz
had died. No explanation was given for his death. Nor was his
family informed. What was reported was the appointment of his
successor, Lieutenant-General Abdul Waheed Kakar. President
Ishaq had made the decision without informing the Prime
Minister, who was livid about not being consulted. Nor had he
been told what had taken the life of General Asif. The Prime
Minister saw a conspiracy in the making. He saw his influence
with the army diminished and he also had reason to believe the ISI
had gained the upper hand in driving military policy. The Prime
Minister’s target, however, was President Ishaq, who was
operating with the special power granted his office under the
Eighth Amendment. Questions were raised as to why Nawaz
would challenge the supreme powers of the President at a time of
parliamentary weakness. Moreover, the army command appeared
unified in support of Ishaq’s action, and it joined ranks against the
Prime Minister. Even Benazir Bhutto involved herself in what had
become a public spectacle. She publicly gave her support to the
same President who had previously dismissed her. Seldom
consistent to principle, Benazir hated Nawaz more than she hated
presidential power.

When the widow of the dead General publicly announced her
husband had been poisoned, the nation had even more reason to
question the machinations of its leaders. Rumor also circulated
that the Prime Minister had ordered the murder of General Asif.
A shocked Nawaz rejected the accusation, and immediately
assembled a three-man judicial commission to investigate the
cause of the General’s death. But before the panel could render its
findings, Benazir publicly urged Ishaq to dissolve the IJI
government, arguing the controversy threatened to tear the country
apart. The mystery, she said, could not be resolved while Nawaz
Sharif remained head of government. Under considerable pressure
to resign, the Prime Minister chose to defend himself in a radio
broadcast. He cited collusion between Ishaq and Benazir, but
ignored the possible role of the army or its clandestine services in
the death of the General. Instead Nawaz pointed to the President,



Democracy and Hypocrisy 227

calling him “the root cause” of all the intrigue, and by innuendo
caused his listeners to conclude the President was behind the death
of the army commander.

The President responded almost immediately to this assault on
his integrity, declaring Nawaz Sharif had committed an “act of
subversion.” He embellished this remark with a scathing attack on
the administration, asserting it was the most corrupt in the history
of the nation. He also hinted that the Prime Minister was indeed
implicated in the death of General Asif Nawaz. On April 18,
1993, President Ghulam Ishaq Khan said he had no choice but to
dissolve the National Assembly and dismiss the government of
Nawaz Sharif. Justifying his action, he said the peace of the
country was at stake. The President insisted his major concern was
the preservation of constitutional order, declaring he had no
interest in power for himself, and said he was appointing Mir
Balkh Sher Mazari to organize a caretaker government until new
elections could be held on July 14.

Like Benazir before him, Nawaz too questioned the action of
the President. He immediately appealed to the Supreme Court,
asking the body to cancel the order. The Supreme Court, however,
took six weeks to respond to the Prime Minister’s appeal. What
the jurists had to say astounded everyone. In all previous legal
contests involving a head of state and a head of government, the
head of state had been upheld. This time, however, the Supreme
Court ruled the President had overstepped his prerogatives and
had acted illegally and unconstitutionally. In an unprecedented
order it called for the reinstatement of the Nawaz Sharif
government.

The country was plunged into deeper chaos as Ishaq and Nawaz
dueled for supremacy. Neither was successful, but together they
put nearly all of Pakistan’s institutions at risk. It was only when
General Waheed Kakar intervened and called upon both the Prime
Minister and the President to resign their positions that a
modicum of stability was restored. Under pressure from the
armed forces and without the institutional support needed to carry
on, both men acknowledged the impasse. On July 18, 1993 they
tendered their resignations. Yet another caretaker government was
authorized, this one led by the Senate Chairman, Wasim Sajjad.
Sajjad’s first decision was to call Moen Qureshi back to Pakistan



228 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

from his home in the United States. Qureshi, a former Vice-
President of the World Bank, was asked to assume the duties of
interim Prime Minister and to ease Pakistan over the monumental
crisis its political and military leaders had created.

Bibliography
Baxter, Craig and Kennedy, Charles, eds., Pakistan 1997, Boulder:

Westview, 1998.
Black, Antony, The History of Islamic Political Thought, New York:

Routledge, 2001.
Burke, S.M. and Ziring, Lawrence, Pakistan’s Foreign Policy, 2nd edn,

Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Burney, I.H., No Illusions, Some Hopes, and No Fears, Karachi: Oxford

University Press, 1996.
Butterworth, Charles, and Zartman, I. William, eds., Between the State

and Islam, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Khan, Mohammad Usman, “Tribal Politics in Balochistan, 1947–1990,”

Ph.D. dissertation, University of Karachi, 1997.
Lambrick, H.T., The Terrorist, London: Ernest Benn, 1972.
Mandaville, Peter, Transnational Muslim Politics: Reimagining the

Umma, New York: Routledge, 2001.
Rais, Rasul Bakhsh, War without Winners: Afghanistan’s Uncertain

Transition after the Cold War, Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Ziring, Lawrence, Pakistan in the Twentieth Century: A Political History,

Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1997.



8
THE EXTERNALITIES OF DOMESTIC
CHANGE

Pakistan reached across oceans and continents for someone who
it was hoped could return the country to a semblance of sanity.
Moen Qureshi, an international civil servant, was summoned
from an assignment in Singapore to tend to an ailing country that
had just experienced the loss of both its President and Prime
Minister. Qureshi’s appointment as caretaker Prime Minister was
a pleasant surprise to the more sophisticated and knowledgeable
public who believed the country needed an erudite technician
to assemble a government of reasonable probity and integrity.
Qureshi was that person and he did not disappoint those who
selected him, or those who put their faith in his ability to steer the
nation away from the treacherous shoals of the preceding years.
All of Pakistan’s institutions and all of its previous leaders had
failed in their service to the nation. Moreover, neither the army
nor the bureaucracy was ready to fill the political vacuum. But
returning the country to the “normalcy” of conventional politics
after the long years of martial law and military rule proved
difficult. Although the politicians had imagined themselves ready
and able to assume the responsibility of good governance, not
only had they failed to grow with the passage of the years, but
they had regressed to a point where primitive struggle had
become their calling. Neither Benazir nor Nawaz was able to rise
to the occasion. Each suffered from a lack of perspective, and

229



230 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

both inflicted considerable pain on the nation they claimed to
love.

Moreover, Pakistan was less than the master of its own destiny.
Influenced by events in the external world, it was forced to react in
ways that were not always in its best interest. So many events
crowded in on the country, events that Pakistan only partially
understood and over which it had little if any say. Still unsure of
itself following the civil war and the dismemberment, Pakistan
was confronted by a war in neighboring Afghanistan that had
been provoked by one of the two twentieth-century superpowers.
The several million Afghan refugees who flooded into Pakistan
were a constant reminder of the proximity of the problem.
Pakistan’s other western neighbor, Iran, also found itself at war,
with Arab Iraq, and that bloody encounter heightened the
revolutionary circumstances imposed on the region by Ayatollah
Khomeini. The energizing of Islamic fundamentalism by the
Ayatollah stood in sharp contrast to Iran’s pre-revolutionary
status as a secular nation. The successful if costly Afghan
resistance as well as the protracted war in the Gulf nourished
religious fervor and gave strength to the forces of radical change.
Sacrifice was rewarded in the retreat and ultimately the demise of
the Soviet Union. Islamic fundamentalism was reified in these
circumstances and more Muslim countries saw their future in
heightened Islamic identity rather than the secular European
colonial dispensation that could only remind them of their
previous condition of servitude.

Pakistan’s Muslim character was never a matter of conjecture.
Muslims’ experience in an India dominated by Hindus kept
spiritual distinctions in full view. Pakistan was established on the
basis that Muslims required a dominant voice in their governance,
and although such a state was realized in 1947, the protracted
nature of the Kashmir dispute kept alive the thought that the
separation from India was incomplete. Resolving the Kashmir
dispute was given the highest priority in Pakistani thinking, not so
much because it was about liberating oppressed Muslims, but
because it justified the original partition of the subcontinent.
Indeed, the quest for a resolution became more important than its
actual resolution in that a protracted struggle enabled Pakistanis
to renew their spiritual commitment indefinitely.



Externalities of Domestic Change 231

Muslim identity and renaissance were more at work in these
experiences than was national purpose. The latter was sacrificed
time and again by Pakistanis who were never quite convinced the
nation-state served their interest or their purpose. The United
States appeared on the scene almost as soon as the British
departed. The nature of the American presence, a manifestation of
the cold war, now with true intention to serve in the building of a
new polity, was another factor beyond the ken of the region’s
inhabitants. How their Muslim nation could accommodate an
alien force from the other side of the world, unfamiliar with South
Asian Muslim experiences, was never successfully articulated. All
that can be said is that Pakistan was born as a consequence of an
imperial recessional. It came into a world dominated by the
presence of two behemoths. Ultimately the Americans were
determined to move the country in a direction it did not choose
for itself. Moreover, inchoate at the time of independence and
subsequently subjected to fits and starts that sapped its energy and
denied institutional development, Pakistan faced its most serious
challenge within itself, but, knowingly or not, outside forces also
gave the nation definition and framed its self-expression.

The caretaker government

Moen Qureshi was the choice of the civil–military bureaucracy, not
the politicians. Agreeing with general opinion that the politicians
were the problem not the promise, Qureshi had the objective of
restoring public confidence in government. Indifferent to patronage
pressures and devoid of political ambition, he treated Pakistan as
any other failed state. His mandate extended for three months,
hardly enough time to show material achievement, but sufficient
time to demonstrate what honest and purposeful leaders can
accomplish. He ordered an overhaul of the economy by devaluing
the rupee and by identifying those who had failed to pay their
utility bills or had defaulted on their loans. Vigorous enforcement
of tax obligations went hand in hand with a freeze on land
distribution for political gain. To cut government expenses, he
ordered the closing of fifteen ministries and ten embassies. He also
imposed a levy on agriculture which was aimed to force the landed
gentry to contribute to the well-being of the nation. Although all



232 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

these reforms added little to the country’s coffers, they nevertheless
sent a message to friend and foe alike that Pakistan deserved real
commitment from all sectors of society, most notably from those
with the capacity to pay for the nation’s development.

The Prime Minister called for sacrifices and belt-tightening
measures. He also took a serious approach to drug trafficking and
gun-running, and called for greater expenditure on law enforce-
ment, health, and social welfare programs. Qureshi struck at the
politicians with the same determination that he addressed
miscreants and anti-social elements. He urged the politicians to
pay their public debts or face a permanent ban on their political
activity. Qureshi also used his United States credentials to appeal
to Washington for a restoration of assistance. When he attempted
to curtail the nation’s nuclear program it was assumed he acted at
the urging of the United States government. Although he insisted
his actions were based solely on the country’s needs and that
Pakistanis required more medical care and education reform than
nuclear weapons, his skeptics and critics were hardly convinced.

Qureshi was not all things to all Pakistanis. He was aggressive
and dedicated, he was honest and selfless, but he also was an
obstacle to the ambitions of many personalities in the public and
private sectors. His reforms also carried negative consequences.
Pakistan’s inflationary problems intensified with the devaluation
of the rupee. Essential commodities jumped in prices and the poor
could not pay for basic necessities. Everything from wheat flour to
natural gas was put beyond the reach of the masses. The Jamaat-i-
Islami led the criticism against the caretaker government, but the
other political parties too were not silent. Arguing it was the
common folk who were most hurt by the Prime Minister’s
decisions, the politicians again described themselves as champions
of the people. Qureshi’s American connection was a ready target,
as was his effort to freeze the nuclear program. The reformer
therefore embittered people across the social spectrum and it was
not long before calls were heard that he be dismissed from his
post. Qureshi had but three months to do his work, but for many
Pakistanis that was three months too many, and the call intensified
for his immediate dismissal.

The caretaker government tried to remedy a serious situation
but in the end it could only provide a bridge to the next election.



Externalities of Domestic Change 233

Qureshi returned to the United States after three brief but
extraordinary months, and those experts he had asked to join
him did likewise. Pakistan was returned to its traditional players
and on October 6–7, 1993 elections were again held for the
National Assembly. The same parties participated in the contest, a
level playing field having been created between the Muslim League
of Nawaz Sharif and the PPP of Benazir Bhutto. The voters showed
little enthusiasm in casting their ballots and the vote split fairly
evenly between the major organizations. In the end, however, the
Pakistan People’s Party won more seats than the Muslim League,
but neither party achieved a majority. The party of Nawaz Sharif
was called to accept the return of Benazir Bhutto despite the fact
the Muslim League had received a higher percentage of the overall
vote. Since the Islamist parties had received only a small percentage
of the total vote, Nawaz had to yield to the PPP, and Benazir
Bhutto was again named Prime Minister of Pakistan. Less than fifty
percent of the eligible voters had actually gone to the polls and
Benazir’s government was constructed on softer ground than last
time, but she nonetheless rose to the occasion, suggesting she had
learned from previous mistakes and that this administration
would be far superior to her last one.

The second Benazir Bhutto administration

During Benazir’s first administration, her surviving brother,
Murtaza, was permitted to return to Pakistan, and in the 1993
Sindh provincial election he won a seat for his Shaheed Bhutto
Committee. Intending to play a more active role as a politician, he
was shielded by his sister from those who wanted him punished
for terrorist activities. At the same time he had sharp differences
with Benazir which caused rifts within the family. He also shunned
the PPP. Benazir shrugged off the family feud and put her efforts
into forming a coalition government that could withstand the
shocks that ended her earlier administration. With assistance
provided by opponents of Nawaz Sharif, Benazir developed
influence over the Punjab as well as Sindh provinces, but had to
yield to a Muslim League coalition that drew the NWFP and
Balochistan into its fold. Benazir’s advantage was highlighted,
however, when her candidate for the presidency, Farooq Leghari,



234 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

defeated his opposition and was declared Pakistan’s head of state.
It was the first time the President and the head of government
hailed from the same party and the development appeared to
herald an era of stability and growth for the nation.

The new President declared he would not interfere with the
operations of government and in fact called upon the legislature to
rescind the Eighth Amendment that Zia had rammed through
parliament to assure his dominance of the political process. The
President’s sentiments found an echo in the Prime Minister’s
statements, and both indicated it was time that Pakistan freed
itself of its colonial past, especially its viceregal tradition. More
optimistic observers were quick to conclude that Pakistan had
suddenly attained maturity, that a two-party system focused on
competitive politics had emerged, and that a more rational and
secular body politic had gained ascendancy. More battle-hardened
analysts, however, were not yet ready to acknowledge a shift in
Pakistani politics. The new government confronted severe
economic dislocation, notably high inflation and unemployment
as well as heavy debts. Pakistani society also struggled with
sustained social conflict. Moreover, the level of societal violence
insured the omnipresence of the civil–military establishment. The
steel frame, it was said, remained the chief arbiter of the nation’s
ills, and hence remained a gray eminence around the Benazir
government.

Nawaz Sharif had left Benazir with an economy that had not
only been mismanaged but had also suffered severe debilitation
from catastrophic floods and plant disease that had destroyed the
cotton, rice, and sugar cane crops. Therefore much of the nation’s
agricultural production had been lost. Whatever gains had been
made in the development of small business were lost in the failure
of major enterprises. The Nawaz government had given a boost to
the transport sector by inundating the country with small taxis,
but this entailed the heavy expenditure of foreign exchange to pay
for the vehicles. In the absence of incentives, gross investment had
declined and even the subsequent actions of the caretaker
government could not reverse the downturn. Fiscal management
had been abominable because of the level of public and private
corruption as well as the ineptitude of those charged with
budgetary responsibility. National debt payments fell further



Externalities of Domestic Change 235

behind schedule, and of course the armed services demanded so
much of the national product that little was left for funding social
needs. Moen Qureshi only had time to dramatize the dilemmas
facing the nation. Although he made an effort to correct some of
the more obvious abuses, it was left to Benazir’s government
to take the necessary measures that might restore a semblance of
national equilibrium.

That task was complicated by Pakistan’s international persona.
The United States placed Pakistan on a terrorist “watch list”
following increased violence in Kashmir and in India’s East Punjab
that was somehow linked to Islamabad. Pakistan was implicated in
terrorist incidents in Europe and the United States which suggested
an Afghan mujahiddin connection. Benazir also was pressured to
freeze Pakistan’s nuclear program. Although she refused to yield
to American entreaties, the new Clinton administration sensed the
Prime Minister’s dilemma and sought other ways to deal with
the issue. Benazir ordered five thousand Pakistani soldiers to
Somalia, where they served in the United Nation’s peacekeeping
force. She also sent troops to Haiti and other world trouble spots,
indicating her desire to assist in efforts to calm tense situations.
Nevertheless, Benazir received no support for Pakistan’s claim to
Kashmir, nor did Clinton open channels for aid that had been
blocked by the previous Bush administration. Moreover, the
contest with India became more intense when the Babri Mosque,
an old Mughal structure located in India, was torn down by a wild
Hindu mob. Retaliation came in the form of assaults on Hindu
temples and other property in Pakistan, and, in addition to
communal strife, there were bombings in both India and Pakistan
that were attributed to militant groups seeking vengeance. Instead
of blaming extremist members of various organizations, India and
Pakistan blamed each other’s government for the attacks. Pakistan
laid the blame on India’s RAW, and India claimed Pakistan’s ISI
was responsible for the mayhem. Both countries expelled
diplomatic personnel. They also massed troops on their mutual
frontier. Skirmishes between Pakistani and Indian forces along the
line of control in Kashmir also became commonplace.

Benazir had a difficult time establishing her government and
addressing the nation’s problems. Attacked from one side by her
mother and Murtaza and on the other by Nawaz Sharif, who was



236 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

still smarting from his loss of power, her defense could hardly be
expected to satisfy the public. Believing she had to neutralize
Nawaz, Benazir took advantage of the unstable conditions in the
NWFP to prorogue the provincial government and impose
governor’s rule. Soon thereafter she installed a PPP government
in the province and lifted the restrictions on political activity. Her
opposition, however, could not remain silent in the face of this
obvious effort to impose her party’s rule throughout the country.
Protest meetings were held from Peshawar to Islamabad and all
the way to Lahore. Nawaz fought back with accusations about
Benazir’s dishonest political practices. He also raised questions
about her personal probity, citing a banking transaction that
netted the Bhutto family considerable wealth. The scandal was
played up in the press and eventually it also trapped the President
in an embarrassing situation. By centering attention on the
excesses of Benazir and her husband, Nawaz Sharif was able to
escape assaults on his own financial activity. Moreover, he
managed to drive a wedge between the Prime Minister and the
President.

Sensing still another attempt to force her from office, Benazir
revealed that during her first administration the ISI chief had
plotted to oust her, and now she implied that similar forces were
trying to destroy her a second time. Benazir believed she had
prevented such a recurrence by ordering the arrest of the former
ISI general. Officers in the army high command, however,
questioned the Prime Minister’s actions and wondered if she had
a genuine complaint or was simply trying to keep the military off-
guard and under tight restraint. Benazir also forced the early
retirement of judges of the Supreme Court and the provincial high
courts, replacing them with PPP stalwarts. The arbitrary nature of
this action did considerable damage to the judiciary, but Benazir
knew what she wanted and paid little heed to the consequences
of her decisions. Clearly, the Prime Minister was fearful of another
coup and was determined to impose her will on all the branches of
government.

Nawaz was not one to yield to these maneuvers. Recognizing
that the army had yet to be heard from, the Muslim League leader
sustained his attack on the Prime Minister. In 1994 he boarded a
train in Karachi, and all along the route that proceeded north he



Externalities of Domestic Change 237

stopped at towns and villages to berate Benazir and accuse her and
her government of arbitrary and tyrannical behavior. Pakistan’s
survival, he declared, was in the hands of its people. Their
willingness to join him in putting Benazir out of government
permanently would answer the question, “whither Pakistan?”
With sufficient numbers appearing to agree with his argument,
Nawaz called for a national work stoppage that paralyzed a
portion but not all of the country. Benazir withstood this assault,
but she had ample notice that her attempt to remain in office
would be difficult.

Just how difficult Benazir’s course would be was seen in
renewed rioting in Karachi, where the mohajirs were both the
victims and perpetrators of violence. The army crackdown fell
hardest on the mohajir community, however, and voices were
heard insisting on the formation of “Mohajir Desh,” or a separate
and independent state. The exiled MQM leader, Altaf Hussain,
was tried in absentia, found guilty of high crimes, and sentenced to
twenty-seven years in prison. This action, however, was hardly the
kind to bring calm to the region. The Mohajir Desh movement did
not reach the proportions of the Bangladesh movement, but the
army was called to action and the drastic measures taken to
restore peace reminded many of the ill-fated crackdown in East
Pakistan. Karachi had become the terror capital of the larger
region. Bombings, assassinations, and mass murder rose to new
levels. Members of the intelligentsia were singled out for no other
reason than their high profile, as were members and installations
of the international community. The inoperative Indian consulate
was closed, but this was little more than a gesture, hardly a serious
attempt to rectify the situation. It was obvious the government
could not bring peace to Karachi or any other area of the country.
Random murders became commonplace, as did more premeditated
sectarian conflicts between Muslim Sunnis and Shiites.

Benazir’s administration also was hurt by PPP defections that
caused splits within the party. The only positive note was a slight
rise in foreign exchange reserves and foreign investment in the
energy sector. Pakistan also received assistance in the form of
loans and grants from the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, and the Asian Development Bank. In 1995, the
United States Congress agreed to provide limited economic



238 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

assistance and to withdraw some of the sanctions imposed in
1990. Hilary Rodham Clinton and her daughter visited Pakistan
in an expression of goodwill and also as a gesture to Benazir, who
was affectionately embraced by America’s first family. Nothing,
however, could mask Pakistan’s multiple dilemmas or the
shakiness of Benazir’s administration.

Benazir revealed that a group within the army was again
planning her overthrow. Publicly revealing they were Islamists,
she said they wanted to terminate her secular government. She
mentioned an unnamed major-general and several brigadiers as
those leading the coup. It was their intention, she noted, to foist an
Islamic state on the nation. Nothing came from this accusation, but
the publicity given to the revelation highlighted the questionable
status of the civilian regime. President Leghari’s personal problems
also caused him to distance himself from the PPP and Benazir.
Complaining about the increasing influence of Asif Zardari, the
President challenged Benazir to rein in her husband. He also
accused Zardari of questionable business ventures in the Punjab.
Moreover, because Benazir had allowed her husband to dominate
PPP policy, the organization’s social platform had been altered to
allow for a more aggressive entrepreneurial program. This shift in
PPP expression had driven many of the party’s original supporters
to quit the organization and form their own groups. Murtaza
Bhutto and his mother also cited the change in PPP direction,
arguing it did damage to the memory of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.
Murtaza promised to develop a party that resembled his father’s
wishes, but his Shaheed Group was not instantly popular and its
existence did more to embarrass his sister’s government than to
firm up his personal political fortunes.

The end of the Benazir Bhutto era

Benazir’s inability to reconcile friends or foes, or, for that matter,
family members, only added to the mayhem coursing through the
country. In 1995, in Karachi alone, more than two thousand
people were murdered, and among the victims were some of the
country’s intellectual and artistic luminaries. Few of the perpe-
trators of violence, however, were identified, let alone arrested.
Periodic sweeps of neighborhoods brought hundreds into custody,



Externalities of Domestic Change 239

but the prevailing custom was to hold them briefly and then order
their release for lack of evidence. Such police enforcement was
hardly a deterrent to criminal acts; and the terrorists were
emboldened to sustain their operations and, if anything, to increase
the intensity of their assaults. Pakistan was no place to develop
democratic norms, and Benazir’s government was hardly in
position, let alone did it enjoy the conditions, to practice democratic
policy. Benazir’s manipulation of the judiciary certainly was not a
reflection of democratic process. Nor was the arrest in October
1995 of forty army officers, who, it was said, intended to take over
the government. Again the focus was on the ISI, especially when
Lieutenant-General Javed Nasir, a former head of the intelligence
directorate, was declared to be the leader of the conspiracy. There
was little if any evidence to implicate the accused, but the
declaration of the conspiracy opened fissures within the army that
forced General Kakar into retirement. He was succeeded by
General Jahangir Karamat. It was unclear how the army would
proceed, but observers saw the change in command as Benazir’s
attempt to bring the military establishment under her control.

On November 30, 1995, Benazir lashed out at what she
described as the evil of tyranny. She accused the late Zia ul-Haq of
so deeply wounding the country that no amount of treatment
promised a cure. Identifying Nawaz Shairf as the heir to Zia’s
policies, she condemned what she called an “unholy alliance” of
religious zealots and politicians whose sole objective was the
destruction of the democratic experiment. She also offered more
details about the intended coup. For the first time, she revealed the
conspirators had intended killing the President, the Prime
Minister, the army chief, and all the corps commanders. Saying
they would have plunged the country into another civil war and
converted Pakistan into a medieval representation of an Islamic
state, she was grateful that the plot was uncovered before it could
be implemented. Pointing to the Afghan war and the United States
CIA that had armed the most radical clerics in the struggle with
the Soviet Union, Benazir noted that those same radicals now
wanted to control and redesign Pakistan.

Benazir’s secular propensities were more in evidence following
the alleged coup, but the question surfaced as to whether she was
too distant from changing conditions within and just outside the



240 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

country. Her tirade against the religious community came at a
time when the army was torn between too much and too little
emphasis on the nation’s spiritual life. President Leghari’s
hesitation in officially designating General Karamat as the new
commander of the Pakistan army was delayed until the spring of
1996 because of this dilemma. This was a critical time for the
Pakistan army, especially with the ISI deeply committed to
bringing order out of chaos in Afghanistan. The army’s sponsorship
of the Taliban, an army of madrassah-trained fighters, was just
beginning to make its mark. Unleashed in Afghanistan in 1993,
the Taliban was supposed to be the answer to the unrelenting
blood feud between the different mujahiddin orders. The
Afghans’ failure to coalesce, to form a stable government
following the Communist defeat, had done serious damage to
an already ravaged nation. General Karamat’s appointment was
intended to maintain the line of succession among the Pakistan
army’s top officers. The President was most concerned that those
officers responsible for overseeing ISI/Taliban operations not be
impeded in their work. The delicate character of the situation
was not lost on Benazir, but she was caught up in the need to
sustain her authority and she failed to understand the gravity of
the issue.

President Leghari had the greater understanding of these
developments. Leghari was sensitive to the need to stabilize the
army command and its control over the ISI. He was likewise
concerned about the need to restore justice and balance to the
political scene. Leghari replaced Bhutto’s appointments to the
Supreme Court with judges approved by the Pakistan Bar
Association who had reputations for unfettered honesty. Benazir
was not happy with the President’s assertiveness, nor was Leghari
pleased with Benazir’s decision making. Moreover, additional
allegations about a range of illicit business dealings had been made
against the Prime Minister’s husband. Nor was Nawaz Sharif idle.
Using every opportunity to denounce the Benazir government, he
found an unexpected ally in Murtaza Bhutto. And Murtaza was
not the only notable to come out against Benazir. Imran Khan, a
sports idol, used this moment to become a politician. Organizing
the Tehrik-e-Insaaf, he too found sufficient fault with Benazir to
link forces with Murtaza Bhutto.



Externalities of Domestic Change 241

But just as this alliance was taking form the nation was shocked
by the news that Murtaza Bhutto had been killed outside his home
by a police detachment. Six members of Murtaza’s entourage were
also shot dead, and word quickly circulated that the deaths were
no accident. The young Bhutto had complained about official
efforts to stifle his party as well as the arrest of seventy members of
his party. But there was no evidence to prove that the police
shooting was more than a response to provocation. Rumor
surfaced, however, that Asif Zardari had ordered the killing.
Murtaza’s wife accused Zardari of arranging a contract on her
husband in order to end a serious challenge to Benazir’s
administration. Whatever the explanation for Murtaza’s violent
death, the event forced President Leghari to call an end to Benazir’s
second administration. Leghari cited the intensification of violence
in the country, Benazir’s manipulation of the judicial system, her
interference with administrative postings, and the rampant
corruption and nepotism in her government. The President also
cited the desperate economic conditions and attributed all the
country’s ills to the PPP’s failure. Benazir made a last-minute
attempt to amend the constitution to forestall her ouster but too
much power was arrayed against her. On November 5, 1996 she
and her government were dismissed and the National Assembly
was dissolved.

Yet another caretaker government was formed, this one under
the leadership of Mairaj Khalid, the aged former leader of the
original PPP. Long having fallen out with Benazir, Mairaj
organized a government of talents to address the country’s
immediate needs and to reassure the nation that the country
would weather this storm as it had those before it. President
Leghari functioned in tandem with the caretaker Prime Minister
and ordered an overhaul of the civil bureaucracy that had been
so undermined by Benazir’s political intrigue. The caretaker
government was granted the authority to purge the civil service of
those who had colluded with the politicians. A thorough house-
cleaning was forecast from the highest to the lowest levels of the
administrative structure, with the purpose of restoring public
confidence in government. Benazir was placed in “protective
custody,” a euphemism that skirted official arrest procedures, but
her husband was detained on suspicion of illegal commercial



242 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

transactions and on account of the need to investigate his role in
Murtaza’s killing. Benazir was not silenced during this latest
ordeal. She accused the authorities of arbitrary actions and of
kidnapping her husband. Because of the President’s attempt to
neutralize her, Benazir offered the thought that if anyone was
responsible for her brother’s death it was the President himself.
Benazir wanted to know why the President included the killing of
her brother in the proclamation dismissing her government. She
followed this query with the thought that a pretext for dismissal
had to be found, even if one had to be fabricated by sacrificing her
brother.

Pakistanis were somewhat impervious to this exchange between
the principal players and displayed little emotion following
Benazir’s departure. Conditions throughout the country were so
dire that few had the inclination to express either satisfaction or
anger at this latest expression of arbitrary government. Even the
United States government, which had so favored Benazir, could
do little more than issue a statement that noted the matter as an
internal affair and said the President had acted within the terms of
the constitution. Only the Pakistan judiciary could rule in Benazir’s
favor, but her appeal to the Supreme Court was strategically
delayed to give the caretaker government the free hand needed to
address the country’s economic crisis and the continuing acts of
social and political violence. Benazir spoke of being stabbed in the
back by President Leghari, a man, she said, who had called her a
sister, and a man she addressed as a brother. It was clear Benazir
would not return to public office, and Mairaj declared other
politicians would be placed on notice that there was no room for
them in Pakistani politics, that in fact all the “feudal lords” were
to be purged from the body politic.

Although the government did not declare a state of emergency,
a Council for Defense and National Security (CDNS) was floated
in January 1997. The CDNS included the President, the Prime
Minister, the Defense Minister, the Interior Minister, the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Chief of the Army Staff, the Chief
of the Naval Staff, and the Chief of the Air Staff. Called an
innovative approach to the constitutional system, this high-level
body reflected the realities obtaining in the country. The political
scene was more a charade than a true indication of real conditions.



Externalities of Domestic Change 243

Since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, Pakistan had functioned
like a garrison state, the armed forces playing the central role in
the country’s political expression. This was certainly the case for
the bulk of Zia ul-Haq’s eleven years in office, and it also proved
to be the case following the removal of the elected Benazir and
Nawaz governments. While the politicians played at politics, the
men in uniform responded to what they judged were the country’s
needs. Moreover, though the military avoided becoming immersed
in the mundane aspects of administration, they represented the
country’s defense apparatus and they bore their responsibilities
with considerable enthusiasm as well as confidence. Thus it was
not surprising that the politicians would view the creation of the
CDNS as a threat to themselves as well as to the nation’s politics.
Arguing that the armed forces were writing themselves into the
constitutional process at the expense of the people’s political
representatives, they called for the order establishing the CDNS to
be rescinded before it became operative.

Military power had been fused to the viceregal tradition as never
before. Even though the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional
legality of the Eighth Amendment that conferred special powers on
the President, the formation of the CDNS meant that even without
so powerful a chief executive the viceregal role could always be
assumed by the generals. Zia ul-Haq had pursued a permanent
place for the military in Pakistan’s political life, and although he
did not live to see his objective realized, those who followed him
sustained the effort and now seemed poised to achieve that
ambition. Crisis was not something that came and went in
Pakistan. The country suffered from sustained instabilities and
what at first glance might have appeared momentary had shown
itself to be continuous and unending. According to the civil–
military elites, it was better to write the armed forces into the
system of governance than to have them act from outside the
political process. The legitimacy of the military role, therefore,
extended beyond the requirement of self-defense and repelling
aggression. The armed forces had demonstrated repeatedly that
they were the permanent guardians of domestic matters too and
that their role in politics was more a necessity than an intrusion.
The CDNS was designed to institutionalize that situation and to
bring reality in tune with philosophy.



244 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

The second Nawaz Sharif administration

On January 16 the Lahore High Court was petitioned to rule the
formation of the CDNS unconstitutional. The President also was
pressured to resign for improper use of his office. On January 29,
however, the Supreme Court finally declared its judgment, ruling
that in removing the Benazir government the President had acted
within his constitutional powers and that the country’s national
security was the most important reason for his action. Elections
for a new National Assembly now went forward without further
delay. The politicians again had their day and before the last ballot
had been cast it was obvious that Nawaz Shairf and the Muslim
League were the major winners. Nawaz won a significant majority
in the National Assembly and did well in all the provincial
legislatures. The PPP, to almost no one’s surprise, was trounced,
losing in every area of the country, including Benazir’s own Sindh
province. Nawaz Sharif’s party was credited with receiving two-
thirds of the total vote, and the PPP lost the leverage it had accrued
in previous elections. In the space of two years Pakistan had gone
from what had appeared to be a balanced two-party system, to
something like a one-party dominant state. Benazir realized the
futility of her situation and sought to make peace with Nawaz.
Saying it was time to break the vicious circle, Benazir declared she
would redefine her political activity and assume her role as leader
of the opposition.

Before fading into the background Benazir called on Nawaz
Sharif to beware the Eighth Amendment. Reducing the President’s
power, however, would not be enough. Benazir also cited the threat
posed by the CDNS and she urged her former rival to neutralize
this body as well. Earlier the Muslim League leader had given his
support to both a strong presidency and the CDNS. Now,
however, mindful of what befell Benazir, the Sharif administration
began to question that position. To be head of government in fact
as well as in name was the Prime Minister’s greatest ambition, and
achieving that status meant coming to grips once again with the
real sources of power in Pakistan. Almost immediately after taking
office, Nawaz moved and the National Assembly approved the
repeal of Article 58 (2b) of the constitution, which gave the
President the authority to dismiss the government. Adopted in a



Externalities of Domestic Change 245

new Thirteenth Amendment the reduction of the Chief Executive’s
powers passed with very little debate and President Leghari signed
it. Having scored a victory over the viceregal tradition, Nawaz
also affirmed he would not legitimate or formalize the CDNS.
Although the Pakistan army commanders still insisted their role
should be written into the constitution, they were relatively
content to leave the issue suspended. What seemed to matter was
the military’s sustained pre-eminence. For Pakistan’s generals
therefore the need for a formally sanctioned body like the CDNS
was not worth quarreling over. Nawaz Sharif, however, interpreted
army willingness to yield on the issue as a new source for his
institutional power over the armed forces, and the newly elected
Prime Minister took the initiative in authorizing more intense
discussions with India, especially over Kashmir. The CDNS
controversy and Sharif’s effort at acquiring greater power,
however, only obscured the rapid rise to prominence of the ISI-
sponsored Taliban movement in Afghanistan.

The Nawaz Sharif government, under pressure from the army,
but especially the ISI, recognized the Taliban regime that had
fought its way into Kabul in 1996. By 1997 the Taliban had seized
most of Afghanistan, save the northern areas where the fighting
continued with rival non-Pashtu units led by a bevy of local
commanders, not the least of which were Masud and Dostum. The
Taliban consisted of Pashtu-speaking people who lived along the
border between Afghanistan and Pakistan. Militant Sunnis, they
became rigorous enforcers of the most austere form of orthodox
Islam. Heavily influenced by Saudi Wahhabism and funded by
Saudi Arabia as a consequence of the Soviet–Afghan war, the
Taliban’s ranks were swelled by Pakistani Pashtuns indoctrinated
in the religious schools along the frontier. To these were added
an international force composed of Arabs, Filipinos, Chechens,
and others drawn from different regions of the Muslim world.
Like Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
recognized the growing and spreading influence of the Taliban,
especially after Mullah Mohammad Omar, a Pashtun from the
Kandahar region, declared himself the “Taliban Emir al-Mu’minin”
(Commander of the Faithful). It was Mullah Omar who
subsequently changed the name of Afghanistan to “The Islamic
Emirate of Afghanistan.”



246 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Saudi Arabian government and business circles sent substantial
sums of money to the Taliban, ostensibly to enable these austere
Muslims to strengthen their Islamic state. A sizeable number of
Saudi subjects also were recruited and trained to fight alongside
the Taliban in their continuing struggle to dominate all of
Afghanistan. The highest-profile figure among them was Osama
bin Laden, a scion of one of Saudi Arabia’s richest families. Bin
Laden had volunteered his services to the mujahiddin in their war
with the Soviet Union. In 1996 he returned to Afghanistan, where
he surfaced as the leader of al-Qaeda, an organization dedicated
to spreading the message of violent revolution against all non-
Muslims, but particularly Americans and their supporters in and
outside the Muslim states. Bin Laden moved freely between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, using his wealth to attract supporters to
his cause, in particular to his formation of an Islamic World
Commonwealth. Soon bin Laden’s al-Qaeda and the Taliban
intertwined to make the Taliban a more formidable fighting force.
Al-Qaeda also protected Mullah Omar, who was considered the
most senior political leader of the Taliban. The Pakistan
government of Nawaz Sharif, through the operations of the ISI,
became a party to these developments, and thousands of
Pakistanis signed up for service with both al-Qaeda and the
Taliban, the two now more or less indistinguishable from one
another.

Although the Taliban were credited with restoring a modicum
of tranquility to areas under their control, albeit under a strict
code of Islamic jurisprudence, there was no peace in the streets
and villages of Pakistan, where sectarian and ethnic violence
continued unabated. The rising tide of violence in Pakistan was for
the moment obscured by Nawaz Sharif’s success in thwarting a
Supreme Court contempt of court order. The outcome of this
proceeding brought the forced resignation of President Leghari
and the departure of Chief Justice Sajjad Ali Shah. It is interesting
to note that Nawaz had won the support, or at least the neutrality,
of the army, and the latter’s hands-off policy seemed to strengthen
civilian rule in the country. What in fact it had done was make
Nawaz Sharif more powerful than any of his predecessors and give
full rein to Pakistan’s more extreme Islamist organizations.
Nawaz, nevertheless, had focused considerable power in the



Externalities of Domestic Change 247

Prime Minister’s office. The Prime Minister named his own
election commissioner and strengthened his legitimacy by
surrounding himself with ultra-orthodox Islamic clerics. Pressing
for passage of a Fifteenth Amendment to the constitution, he
aimed to bypass the parliament, the judiciary, and the provincial
governments by emphasizing the elevation of Shari’a (Islamic
laws) above secular law. Unrestrained by the common law, Nawaz
anticipated achieving maximum power as the leader of a Muslim
people who were wholly subject to Islamic jurisprudence. Nawaz
therefore had his sights on transforming Pakistan into an Islamic
state only slightly different from Afghanistan under the Taliban.
Talk of the Talibanization of Pakistan circulated throughout the
country, much to the distress of those Pakistanis who feared a
complete merger of politics with religion.

Fearing a threat to their traditional local authority, and perhaps
more so a Punjabi attempt to monopolize political life in the
country, representatives from Sindh, Balochistan, and the NWFP
protested their loss of autonomy, and cries were heard for
restructuring Pakistan along multinational lines. They called for
the drafting of a new constitution that would guarantee the
independence of the different regions, and twenty-eight ethnic and
regional organizations came together to form the Pakistan
Oppressed Nations Movement (PONM). The PONM called for
a loose federation of autonomous and sovereign ethnic nations.
It demanded that each be considered a “state” under the 1940
Lahore (Pakistan) Resolution and that each unit be vested with the
necessary powers to function in accordance with the customs and
traditions of its population. The Pakistan Oppressed Nations
Movement also received encouragement from the PPP, which had
joined with fourteen small parties to create the Pakistan Awami
Itehad (Pakistan People’s Alliance). During the same period,
Farook Leghari formed his Millat Party. All these maneuvers
appeared to be aimed at preventing Nawaz Sharif from emulating
the Afghan Emir, Mullah Omar.

The linkage between political developments in Pakistan and
Afghanistan had became clearer. With the Pakistan army straddling
both countries and with Islam the central motif of their respective
political systems, the objectives of the two states began to
coincide. Afghanistan had demonstrated greater momentum for



248 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

the realization of an Islamic state. The Taliban had been a
welcome arrival for an Afghan people exhausted from almost two
decades of brutal warfare. And though the Taliban imposed severe
limitations on individual behavior, the vast majority of Afghans
appeared to tolerate the harshness of their Islamic code. Pakistan,
by contrast, had escaped a sustained assault on its territory,
excepting the loss of East Bengal, one thousand miles to the east,
and what remained of the western region was more a threat to
itself than threatened from outside. The veneer of sophistication
and civility that projected a global personality for the modern
Pakistan, however, had rubbed thin with the sustained emphasis
on Islamization. Forces never judged mainstream had become a
mighty river and in the circumstances associated with national
catharsis a different standard had been established for the
measurement of Pakistani behavior.

Religious minorities were at particular risk in the new
circumstances. Long the targets of majority community abuse,
Ahmadiyya and Christians were prominent victims of the self-
appointed purifiers of Islamic spirituality. Blasphemy laws were
approved by the Muslim League dominated National Assembly
which called for the death penalty against those deemed
disrespectful of the Prophet, or who challenged the interpretation
of scripture. In May 1997, a Faisalabad court sentenced a poor
and illiterate Christian to death for misspeaking the name of the
Prophet. A local Christian priest protested the court proceeding
and the sentence by taking his own life, but nothing seemed to
stem the violence. Punjabi villages, where minority groups had
lived side by side with orthodox Muslims for generations, were
almost overnight transformed into hamlets of communal blood-
letting. Subject to vilification, beatings, and death, minorities
looked to the government for assistance but the latter failed time
and again in its mission to defend the persecuted. Not only were
Christians assaulted as never before, but sectarian contests
between Shiites and Sunnis attained new levels of violence. Again
officials were slow to react to maintain law and order, let alone to
mete out justice. The breakdown of civil society was also seen in
the rising levels of criminal behavior. No one could claim security
on the nation’s highways or in their homes as gangs of thieves and
cut-throats operated at will and without fear of retribution.



Externalities of Domestic Change 249

Not everyone in the Pakistan army ignored the intensification of
ethnic, sectarian, and criminal violence. Nor was the army
prepared to see Nawaz Sharif amass unchecked political power.
Moreover, the greater the Prime Minister’s quest for absolute
power, the more the country seemed to slip into anarchy. It simply
did not follow that an all-powerful civilian executive translated
into a more secure society. Nawaz had appointed an acknowledged
nobody to serve as Pakistan’s President. Rafiq Tarar, who took
office on January 1, 1998, was known for only one thing, his
friendship with and complete subordination to the Prime Minister.
Tarar’s presidency meant Nawaz Sharif had a free hand in
amassing the power to satisfy his needs, but it also meant the
country would be left without the necessary institutional strength
to deal with the multitude of national issues. Nepotism and blatant
corruption were hallmarks of the Nawaz Sharif government.
Pakistan’s economy was allowed to decline to new depths. The
only advantages accrued to Nawaz Sharif’s get-rich courtiers, who
lavished rewards upon themselves in open view of a semi-paralyzed
public.

Democracy was nothing more than a sham. The Prime Minister
and his minions operated without the intended constitutional
constraints. The Pakistan Supreme Court listed government
violations of fundamental rights, rule making by ordinance, and
gross displays of arbitrary decision making. Although the Supreme
Court tried to rectify the wrongs by judicial action, the Sharif
regime did not deviate from its venal pursuits or its goal of
achieving absolute power. Only the army high command was in a
position to deflect the Nawaz steamroller. The task of taking on
the Prime Minister therefore fell to the Chief of the Army Staff,
General Jehangir Karamat. In an unusual display of candor,
Karamat made a number of public statements about his personal
concerns. Indicating that the Nawaz Sharif government had
exposed the nation to problems that threatened its very existence,
the General expressed the opinion that only the armed forces were
in position to organize as an alternative.

In October 1998, Karamat raised anew the question of the
armed forces and their constitutional duty: the notion of a
National Security Council composed of uniformed officials and
supported by the best civilian brains in the country. Karamat did



250 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

not reject the Islamists, but it was obvious from his presentation
that he believed the country could not survive guided by the more
primitive members of the Islamic tradition. Nawaz, as those before
him, had nurtured the fundamentalists and, knowingly or not, had
fertilized and watered the seeds of division and blind hatred. The
bitter fruit derived from internecine and sectarian conflict had
caused alienation and despair. Insisting there must be a return to
rational government, Karamat called for an end to mindless
vendettas in the name of religion and ethnic identity. A polarized
nation was a nation in conflict with itself, and he reminded his
listeners that Pakistan was a dream of salvation for Muslims of the
subcontinent, but it was also a positive statement about the future
of the human condition. Pakistan was meant to be a national state
and only a national design provided a home for diverse people.
Indeed, Pakistan was created in the belief that Muslims were
comfortable in a country that embraced people of different ethnic
backgrounds. Karamat called for the refashioning of a professional
apolitical bureaucracy with the capacity to administer a complex
society. Pakistanis, he seemed to suggest, had been too long at war
with one another. It was time to call a truce, and nothing would
benefit the nation more than a period of extended calm. People
needed to ponder what brought them to this moment so that a
course more in keeping with popular need could be identified. If
the Nawaz Sharif administration did not take on this responsibility,
a substitute administration would have to be found. Not
unexpectedly, Sharif found Karamat’s presentation a serious
breech of trust and demanded Karamat’s resignation.

Though not oblivious to the clash between Sharif and Karamat,
the army high command was too preoccupied with other matters
to come to the defense of the Chief of the Army Staff. In May
1998, Pakistan entered the circle of select nuclear powers when,
following India’s lead, it detonated six nuclear devices. The
Pakistan army also publicly demonstrated its surface-to-surface
missile capability by successfully launching intermediate range
rockets wholly manufactured in Pakistan. Pakistan thus signaled
to New Delhi that it would no longer cow before India’s military
prowess. The Pakistani generals also had to weigh the international
repercussions of their demonstration, including the cost to the
country of the economic and military sanctions imposed by the



Externalities of Domestic Change 251

United States and European governments. Furthermore, the war in
Afghanistan ruptured Islamabad’s relations with Teheran when
the latter opposed the Taliban and supported Masud’s Northern
Alliance. Pakistan’s connection to Osama bin Laden also came
under greater scrutiny. Thus, when the American embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania were destroyed with heavy loss of life, the
Clinton administration launched missile strikes at some of bin
Laden’s camps in Afghanistan and it came as no surprise that the
heaviest criticism of the American action came from Pakistan.

With so much of consequence consuming the time and energy
of the army commanders, Karamat’s criticism of the Sharif
government received scant attention. The Prime Minister’s choice
for the new army COAS was General Pervez Musharraf, a general
in the lower tier of commanding officers, but, most important, an
officer Nawaz believed he could successfully manage. Sworn in on
October 7, 1998, Musharraf had been selected by Nawaz’s inner
circle. Sharif believed that the General, as the son of an Indian
refugee, an Urdu member of the Karachi mohajir community,
would be more pliable than a Punjabi or Pashtun. Moreover,
Sharif was confident Musharraf would be too focused on
managing the generals in his command to meddle in civilian
politics. Unlike Karamat, therefore, Musharraf was expected to
ally himself with the Muslim League administration.

Anatomy of a coup

Nawaz Sharif talked about democracy, but his administration was
more like a Mughal court. Nawaz ignored the conventions of
cabinet government: he neither held cabinet meetings nor made
cabinet decisions. Surrounded by family members and a few close
associates, Sharif’s actions were more in tune with absolute
monarchy than with representative government. A pompous and
sanctimoniously self-righteous individual, he trusted few and
suspected almost everyone. Without direct access to his thoughts,
one can only assume he envisaged himself the fountainhead of
power in a modern Sultanate rather than the elected and
accountable leader of a sovereign people.

Of course, the people of Pakistan were denied their sovereignty
in the early years after partition. Sovereignty belonged to the



252 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Eternal, and only God’s vicegerent was considered worthy of
managing the earthly domain. By extension, therefore, the Muslim
state’s leaders were ordained to rule, and for the most part to rule
absolutely. Sharif embodied the governing style of God’s anointed;
he also chose to inject a quality of mystery into his administration.
Moreover, his Islamist tendencies allowed him to evoke a Pakistan
guided by the spiritual instincts imbedded in the psyche of the
nation. Since he allied with and encouraged the more primitive
elements in the Islamic tradition, conservative orders otherwise
obscured by more sophisticated and worldly ideas flowered and
multiplied. Energized by the unfinished business in Kashmir and
the revolutionary character of Islam in Iran and Afghanistan, as
well as the emergence of the Muslim republics of Central Asia,
an ambience had materialized that spoke of the death of the
European-contrived national state and the rebirth of a historic
Islamic order. Nawaz Sharif’s perception of the world was hardly
different from his perception of a future Pakistan. Pakistan was to
be the central actor in the unfolding of a new and glorious chapter
in the history of the Islamic people.

Jinnah had resisted the forces of fundamentalism in the years
before independence, and Nawaz Sharif was no Jinnah. Moreover,
although the Islamists could be ignored, as was the case from
Jinnah to Yahya Khan, they could not be eliminated. The distance
between the educated few and the undereducated many could not
be ignored. Nor was it possible to prevent the poor and illiterate
masses from seeking the services of the Islamic fundamentalists
who contributed little to the establishment and sustenance of
the Pakistani nation. Consumed by a mindset conditioned by
extraterritorial and supernatural experience, the self-styled repre-
sentatives of Islamic tradition more than the secular politicians
articulated the concerns and needs of the great, unspoken-for
majority. The secular symbols of independence and self-government
could not be expected to compete with the expositors of religious
ritual. Shunted aside by the enlightened leaders of the Pakistan
Movement, the clerics saw in the formation of a Muslim state
in the subcontinent not the end, but rather the beginning of a
process. Pakistan’s emergence as an independent state was the
beginning of a transformation that would not be complete until
the Islamic ummah had manifested itself in the tradition of the



Externalities of Domestic Change 253

salifiyya, the building of a righteous and pious community of
believers from one end of the Islamic world to the other.

The only institution to survive Pakistan’s first half century was
the Pakistan army. Denied in Kashmir and battered by the civil
war in East Bengal, the army nonetheless prevailed. Humbled by
the Indian army that had dismembered the original Pakistan, the
Pakistan army of General Zia ul-Haq saw the opportunity to
retrieve victory from defeat by emphasizing the army’s Islamic
bona fides. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan indicated that
Islam faced danger not only in India but in Afghanistan as well
and that Pakistan could reclaim its purpose by helping the Afghan
people to repel the aggressor. Followers of the Prophet could not
avoid being caught up in this struggle and the Muslims who
answered the Afghan call for assistance journeyed to that remote
land from the margins of the Islamic world. Already energized by
the Ayatollah Khomeini in Iran, Islam became the leitmotif for an
ingathering of believers, all dedicated to a single cause, not just the
freeing of Afghanistan, but the liberation of the Muslim ummah.

Thus the once contained Islamists of Pakistan were transformed
into major agents of change. Roles were reversed as the more
contemporary members of Pakistani society sought refuge in
obscurity at home or domicile in distant lands. Nawaz Sharif’s
manner of governance was proof that the original understanding of
democracy had lost its relevance. No Pakistani politician had
enjoyed the power that Nawaz manifested at the beginning of the
last year of the twentieth century. It did not matter that he had
alienated the conventional politicians or had caused severe distress
in the regions outside the Punjab. Not yet satiated, Nawaz Sharif
connived to entrench himself in a political process that no longer
represented constitutional constraints, a process that he had
manipulated to satisfy his personal need for even greater authority.
Only the Press appeared to challenge his grab for total power, and in
January 1999 the Prime Minister called for the sacking of a number
of reporters and commentators who had the temerity to criticize his
government. When the Press resisted the Prime Minister’s com-
plaint, the administration found other ways to bring compliance.
Charges of tax evasion and the misuse of privilege were hurled at
the fourth estate, and in May prominent journalists were arrested
and others were intimidated by undercover intelligence agents.



254 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

The administration’s bad press disturbed more balanced
members of the Pakistan Muslim League who used more
conventional tactics in tackling their adversaries in the other
parties. Seeking a rapprochement with the NWFP Awami National
Party and Karachi’s Muttehida Qaumi Movement (the revised
name of the MQM), the Muslim Leaguers called for a new
alliance and a power-sharing arrangement that would enhance all
their policies. The opposition parties, however, were so disgusted
with the Prime Minister that they refused to accept the offer. The
Punjab’s expanding power had come at the expense of the smaller
provinces and minorities, and their Oppressed Nations Movement
represented their best chance to balance the larger province’s
power. Moreover, some Punjabis connected with the Nawaz
regime had incited religious conflict in both the NWFP and
Balochistan, and the most radical of the Islamists had raised a
demand for the Talibanization of the frontier region. Sindh,
however, was the scene of even more intensive conflict. Governor’s
rule had been imposed in the province in October 1998 and by the
end of the year the government had established summary military
courts to mete out justice to those found guilty of violating the
peace of the region. Two death sentences were carried out under
these military tribunals before the Supreme Court in February
1999 declared the military courts unconstitutional. Checked by
the Supreme Court, Nawaz appointed a personal adviser to be the
virtual chief minister in Sindh province. This adviser, Ghous Ali
Shah, appointed a council of advisers to act as a provincial
cabinet, all without any reference to Sindh’s elected legislature and
a clear violation of provincial autonomy.

The Sindh takeover was as much a reflection of opposition
disarray as it was a demonstration of the Prime Minister’s power.
The politicians continued to be their own worst enemies as they
failed again and again to reconcile their differences or to sustain
their efforts to weaken the ruling regime. The Pakistan Oppressed
Nations Movement ceased to be an effective organization as
member groups defected and rival politicians insisted on finding
fault with their peers. The PPP too was wanting. Benazir had little
option but to remain in exile after being convicted on several
counts of corruption. She had been sentenced to a five-year term in
prison. Without her peculiar gifts and charismatic qualities, the



Externalities of Domestic Change 255

party could not expect to mount a challenge to the Pakistan
Muslim League, and it was obvious from the statements of PPP
party officials that only the Pakistan army could derail the Nawaz
Sharif juggernaut.

The army, however, had more immediate problems. In May a
full-scale engagement erupted in the high mountain Kargil region
of Kashmir. Although Pakistan claimed the action had been
initiated by Kashmiri freedom fighters, New Delhi provided a
different account. India argued the Kargil operation had been
launched from the highest level of the Pakistan government and
army. Rumor circulated that General Pervez Musharraf had
ordered the operation to demonstrate to his Punjabi and Pashtun
comrades that he was committed to wresting Kashmir from Indian
control. Kargil overlooked a strategic pass that India used to ferry
supplies to its forces. If Pakistan gained control of the region,
Islamabad believed its leverage in negotiating a Kashmir settle-
ment would be considerably enhanced. Thus the campaign was
approved and Pakistani troops, disguised as guerrillas, moved into
the region. India, however, was prepared for the incursion, and
from May to July its troops struggled to beat back the invading
force. Both sides suffered heavy losses, but the Pakistanis took the
more severe punishment and what was left of the force retreated
back across the line of control. The Nawaz government was
embarrassed by the failure and insisted it knew nothing about the
operation. Holding to its position of denial and faced with
international criticism, the Nawaz government tried to place all
the blame for the Kargil operation on General Musharraf.

General Musharraf was to be Nawaz Sharif’s sacrificial lamb.
Replacing him, however, proved anything but simple. Senior
commanders of the Pakistan army had reason to stand by their
COAS. It was the Prime Minister, not Musharraf, who gave the
order to terminate the Kargil campaign, and despite their losses
the commanders clung to the view they could overcome Indian
superiority. The Prime Minister’s decision, therefore, was not
popular. Karamat’s dismissal now received belated attention and
the move to dismiss still another COAS was judged intolerable.
The generals refused to give homage, nor did they view Sharif’s
accumulation of power as in their interests. Determining that only
they stood before the Prime Minister’s intention to acquire



256 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

absolute dominance, Musharraf’s colleagues decided to stand by
the General. Nor was Musharraf oblivious to the storm swirling
around him. There was common agreement that nothing less than
the future of the army was at stake, and the decision was taken
to resist the Prime Minister’s action. Sharif was pressured to
announce that Musharraf would remain COAS until his term
expired in October 2001.

Sharif, however, had no intention of keeping that pledge. He
immediately moved to retire a number of generals and to shift
others to different assignments. The Inter-Services Intelligence was
also active in promoting the Prime Minister’s wishes, and the ISI
reported on meetings between Musharraf and some of the corps
commanders. The generals therefore were forced to be circumspect
in their actions. Not only were they dealing with a very powerful
political personality; they also had to contend with the ISI and
other officers who wanted Musharraf removed. While the Prime
Minister and his henchmen proceeded with their behind-the-scenes
maneuvers, a counter-plan was developed by Musharraf and those
loyal to his command.

Musharraf left on a prearranged visit to Sri Lanka on October 9,
1999, while his brother officers planned the takeover of the
country and the removal of the government. These plans were not
as secret as they had wanted. The opposition parties had called for
major demonstrations against the Sharif government. They had
also renewed their call for the army to depose the Prime Minister.
Sensing an impending coup, Sharif had sent his brother and ISI
General Ziauddin to Washington with the hope of getting the
Clinton administration to lift its sanctions in return for Pakistan’s
acceptance of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and greater
cooperation in the search for bin Laden. The Americans were told
to ignore the complaints of Benazir Bhutto and Imran Khan and to
acknowledge the threat to the democratically elected government.
Thus, there was some relief in Islamabad when the U.S.
government issued a series of statements calling for the preservation
of stability and the upholding of constitutional principle. It was
obvious that both sides were using the United States and that
neither had any intention of satisfying American wishes.

Nawaz Sharif made a sudden flight to the United Arab Emirates
on October 11, but left the next day. By October 12, Nawaz had



Externalities of Domestic Change 257

returned to Pakistan and he immediately ordered Musharraf’s
return flight from Colombo to be diverted and prevented from
landing in Pakistan. Lieutenant-General Ziauddin, the Director
General of the ISI, was ushered into the Prime Minister’s official
residence and told he would replace Musharraf as COAS. The
generals loyal to Musharraf, however, rejected the Prime
Minister’s action. They also prevented Islamabad television and
radio stations from announcing the change. Pro-Musharraf forces
immediately moved to secure the Rawalpindi cantonment as well
as critical installations in the capital. Moreover, the Prime
Minister’s house was surrounded and Nawaz was urged to rescind
his dismissal order. When he refused he was arrested along with
General Ziauddin.

True to the Prime Minister’s instructions, Karachi officials
prevented Musharraf’s plane from landing. However, the crew of
the PIA (Pakistan International Airways) plane, with two hundred
passengers aboard, indicated that fuel was running low and that
the aircraft could not remain aloft or fly to another destination.
Thanks to the pleas of the pilot, the plane was called to a landing
site at Nawabshah, more than one hundred miles north of
Karachi, and the authorities were alerted to arrest Musharraf as he
deplaned. In the ensuing moments, word reached Karachi Corps
Headquarters that Islamabad had been seized by the commanding
generals and that Nawaz had been arrested along with the ISI chief.
The Karachi cantonment was instantly mobilized. Units of the
Pakistan army captured the Karachi airport and took into custody
the bureaucrats and officials of the Nawaz administration. All of
Karachi soon came under military rule, and the plane carrying
General Musharraf was finally allowed to land. On the ground
and surrounded by officers from Karachi Army Headquarters,
Musaharraf declared the Nawaz Sharif government had been
removed, that the President would remain in office, but that all
government agencies had come under army control.

Bibliography
Kennedy, Charles, ed., Pakistan 1992, Boulder: Westview, 1993.
Kennedy, Charles and Rais, Rasul Bakhsh, eds., Pakistan 1995, Westview,

1995.



258 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Magnus, Ralph H., “Afghanistan in 1997: The War Moves North,” Asian
Survey, 38 (2), 1998, pp. 109–15.

Neamatollah Nojumi, The Rise of the Taliban in Afghanistan: Mass
Mobilization, Civil War, and the Future of the Region, New York:
Palgrave, 2002.

Rizvi, Hasan-Askari, “Pakistan in 1998: The Polity under Pressure,”
Asian Survey, 39 (1), 1999, pp. 177–84.

Rizvi, Hasan-Askari, “Pakistan in 1999: Back to Square One,” Asian
Survey, 40 (1), 2000, pp. 208–18.

Shadid, Anthony, Legacy of the Prophet: Despots, Democrats, and the
New Politics of Islam, Boulder: Westview, 2001.

Syed, Anwar, “Pakistan in 1997: Nawaz Sharif’s Second Chance to
Govern,” Asian Survey, 38 (2), 1998, pp. 116–25.



9
THE POLITICS OF TERRORISM

Another military coup and another wild celebration in the streets
of Pakistan. Another unpopular albeit elected government had
succumbed to its own excesses, and another army commander
had seized the reins of power. It had become so familiar, almost
predictable. It was more than fifty years since independence but
Pakistan was still in search of a political framework to contain
its errant society. The country that strove to be a nation had
demonstrated yet again that national unity had no more reality
than half a century before. National identity remained elusive as
one millennium ended and another began. After so many tests
and so much tragedy there was ample evidence to prove Pakistan
was meant to be but never became a nation-state. A divided
people at the outset, Pakistan remained a divided country. The
vast gulf separating the enlightened minority from the traditional
majority, the educated from the uneducated, the contemporary
achievers from those rooted in past circumstances was never
bridged. So many failed personalities had aspired to lead the
entity called Pakistan. So much energy had been expended, so
many dreams dashed, so many promises unrealized, so much
rethinking, so much maneuvering, that as the year 1999 gave
way to 2000, only exhaustion and lamentations were left to
remind those still caring what had been the vision and what had
become reality.

259



260 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

No one had truly charted Pakistan’s future. Too little time as
well as the pressure of events denied any would-be leader from
designing a program that could be embraced by all the people
calling themselves Pakistanis. A creature molded by the two great
wars of the twentieth century, Pakistan was born into the cold war
and was never really free to imagine a destiny different from the
one ordained by its colonial mentor. Made an instant adversary of
its adjacent and larger neighbor by a colonial power in haste to
remove itself from the burden of empire, Pakistan was destined
to remain an incomplete idea rather than the living model of an
oriental society transformed by global exposure. Social conflict
not constructive performance symbolized Pakistan. Hostility from
without defined its ethos, and penetrated the core of the nation,
and as it defined relationships abroad, so too it defined the
condition that would pit one Pakistani against another, separate
one region from another, and do terrible violence to the national
idea. The civil war devoured the idea that Muslims, no matter how
disparate, how different in expression, how distant in geography,
were still a single and harmonious people. The new Pakistan tried
to bury the memory of that horrific bloodletting, but no matter the
effort to conceal it, the legacy of internecine conflict could not be
expunged. Moreover, the war in East Bengal cut more deeply than
the communal strife at partition. The latter was sublimated as a
price of independence, whereas the former proved to be the very
denial of the country created at independence.

Pakistan’s failure to accept its shortcomings, and they were
legion, caused it to live with falsehood and conceal truth. It was
not yet a nation, and even its status as a country was questioned.
Allusions to unity and national resolve were addressed by the
country’s armed forces that were never far removed from their
colonial origin. Repeated army intervention in Pakistan’s political
life was never meant to be more than the interposition of power
between the forces of anarchy and those believing in a workable
future. A surrogate for the departed colonial authority, the military
remained in place so that the country could find time to correct
course and seek an appropriate path. But the military would not
be content with a mere holding action. Nor would external events
permit the luxury of trial and error. Army leaders were by calling
responsible for international matters, but they also became astute



The Politics of Terrorism 261

observers of the domestic situation. As if waiting on a maturing
polity, they expected that the politicians would learn their roles
and perform the tasks of governance with the same professionalism
expected in the uniformed services.

Army intervention in the country’s political life was encouraged,
indeed welcomed. But the soldiers, it was said, remained too long.
Given the frailties of Pakistan’s institutions, the repeated disrespect
for constitutions and the rule of law, only the army could
effectively challenge runaway political power; but having called
the army to such service, those who would advantage themselves
from its actions would just as soon have it disappear. This the
soldiers were not prepared to do. Claiming only they were capable
of seeing both the international and domestic horizons, the army
commanders extended their stay, outlived their welcome, and were
themselves made the subject of popular condemnation. Observers
of the Pakistan scene long ago convinced themselves that the army
was not the answer but the problem in all that ailed the country.
Pakistan’s democratic growth, it has been argued, was stifled by
military intrusion. Moreover, it was the military that prompted the
violence that eventually overwhelmed the country. Liaisons
between the armed forces and the more rabid elements in Pakistan
society were seen as relationships between like-minded actors,
neither of which wanted Pakistan to emerge as a democratic state.
Religion not democracy was their unifying principle, and they
found common ground after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

But not only the Pakistan army was to blame for the failure of
democracy in Pakistan. Nor did the army stand apart from society
in encouraging the Islamists to play their narrow game. The
Kashmir issue was made the responsibility of the army, but
the dispute was neither prompted nor sustained by the men in
uniform. Kashmir was a defining experience for Pakistanis before
and even more so after the loss of East Pakistan. The army was
called to service a demand it came to make its own, not out of
ideological commitment, but as a consequence of geostrategic
concerns. If the two eventually intermingled it was just as much a
consequence of popular fervor as it was a calculated decision by
military thinkers. The same could be said of the army’s role in
Islamization. As strongly committed to religious issues as they
were, the soldiers were no more identified with spiritual causes



262 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

than their civilian compatriots. The men who led the armed forces
were just as committed to secular objectives as their counterparts
in high political circles. Both addressed the mundane as much as
they did the eternal, both found in the eclectic experience the
merging of worldviews. Neither the one nor the other was a better
representative of secular or religious calling.

Pakistan shifted course more firmly to Islamization even as it
found fault with the General whose name was attached to that
policy. Moreover, Islamization was as much a reaction to the civil
war as it was to the deep-felt need to realize the Muslim genius in
Pakistan. Islamization was also a potent weapon in the clash of
arms with the Soviet Union in Afghanistan. The Soviets could not
be matched as a military machine, but what advantage they gained
from their superpower status was more than offset by the
willingness of those resisting their intrusion to fight and die for
a particular cause. Religion became the central factor in the war in
Afghanistan, a war the Soviet Union did not lose, but also could
not win. Pakistan, and its army, could not stand idle while
Afghanistan was being assaulted. Both geopolitics and religion
played important roles. Moreover, the heavy role played by the
United States in sponsoring the Islamization of the war while
opposing Islamization in revolutionary Iran reveals that it was not
just Pakistanis who were uncertain about their course of action.
Act now and worry later was a condition that permeated the
struggle. But the ambivalence of Pakistan’s support and the failure
to effectively manage complex social issues complicated the
methods of providing support. They also confused the issue of
who would be the preferred recipients of that support.

Domestic violence within Pakistan had been a fact of life from
the moment the country achieved independence. Terrorism was an
ancient phenomenon in the subcontinent. If it was not given
serious attention it was because, domestically, it was so common
an occurrence and, internationally, it failed to register an impact.
Terror and the use of terror to achieve goals not approached
through other means were considered a law-and-order matter, and
so long as terrorism could be contained or localized, its impact
was considered marginal. Terrorism during the colonial period
therefore represented a form of popular protest that was either
containable or a matter of political leverage in achieving specific



The Politics of Terrorism 263

goals. But the independence of Pakistan, its inchoate nature, its
sustained turmoil, its numerous struggles within itself as well as
with its neighbors brought a new dimension to the subject of
terrorism. An ill-defined country, containing contradictory forces,
Pakistan also sought a measure of status in the wider world. Its
people poor and largely illiterate, Pakistan nevertheless progressed
along a scale of material and physical achievement that caused
people to subsume its real condition. Technological and scientific
achievements were the work of the few not the many, however,
and it was the few who in 1998 ushered Pakistan into the circle of
nuclear weapons powers.

The Pakistan house was in disarray, its basic infrastructure
primitive and failing, but nothing had prevented the country from
acquiring nuclear capability. The contrast between such scientific
achievement and the pitiful economic status of most of the
country’s population can be compared with the quest for
sophisticated democratic institutions by the few and the conception
of an Islamic state for the many. It was the interfacing of future and
past that elevated the terror factor in Pakistan. Militant Islamists
presented themselves as the bridge between the world of the future
and the world of tradition. Rejecting secular performance as
blasphemous, militant Islamists adopted a form of reverse
Marxism to explain their violent purpose. Marx’s opiate became
the Islamists’ elixir. As Marx had forecast the dialectical struggle
between economic classes, so the Islamists echoed a parallel
refrain in the clash between the familiar Muslim religious tradition
and the less familiar secular outlook. Unlike Marx, however, who
addressed the dynamics of historical progress and called for the
unity of the downtrodden, the militant Islamists spoke a language
that described and glorified a history that centered more on
distinguishing the eternally righteous from the eternally damned.
Marx summoned the workers of the world to unite against their
managerial oppressors and assume control of their destiny. The
Islamists called on tradition-bound Muslims, the vast majority
reliving through daily ritual a cherished past, to cast off those who
threatened their obeisance. Marx centered his philosophy on the
synthesis of all that went before; militant Islamists rejected
synthesis in their effort to reclaim an original thesis. Marx was
focused on a utopian future, the Islamists on a resurrected past.



264 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Pakistan’s failure to address the searing issue of mass education
is writ large in the appeal of the Islamists among the general
masses. Moreover, the failure of Pakistan’s modernists to satisfy
minimum objectives, namely the formation of civil society, is writ
large in the emergence of a leadership that long dwelled in the
shadows of national experience. What had been marginal, with
the passage of time, and particularly with the failure of the
country’s modernists, had become mainstream. The Islamists
had captured the imagination of the many, and the few who had
represented themselves as leaders and agents of change were
forced to the sidelines or pressured to follow along. The most
militant among the Islamists are those who took the lead, their
violent acts targeting the perceived alien flotsam of Pakistani
society. The war in Afghanistan gave the Islamists a defined enemy
and permitted them to network with those across the Muslim
world who shared their narrow interpretation of scripture as well
as their willingness to confront an identifiable enemy. Just as
Afghanistan became the catalyst for an interlocking of the faithful,
so too Kashmir became for Pakistani radicals and their supporters
the defining issue in the destruction of the secular state.

Linkages between the Pakistan military establishment and the
militant Islamists were forged in the unresolved Kashmir dispute.
So closely aligned were the two that it became difficult to
distinguish the one from the other. The 1999 Kargil incident was
just the latest example of the blurring of lines between those
professing Islamic and national goals. The Pakistan army’s role in
Afghanistan could not end with the withdrawal of Soviet forces.
Too committed to an Islamic solution, Pakistan identified with the
Taliban and the Taliban in turn joined hands with the Afghan
Arabs associated with Osama bin Laden. The holy war against
the chief representative of Marxism had been won, but the war
against the new infidels of northern Afghanistan and elsewhere
had just begun. So too the renewed struggle in Kashmir.

Pakistan’s allies in the al-Qaeda and the sundry movements it
spawned to make war in Kashmir were far more responsive to the
military’s established goals than anything experienced during
the years of global cold war. In alliance with a cross-section of the
Muslim world, Pakistan envisaged a payoff that could never be
realized in its alliances with the United States and the West. But



The Politics of Terrorism 265

intimacy with militant Islamists also posed a potential link between
the latter and the weapons of mass destruction the Pakistan army
had so energetically made their goal. In the marriage of Islamic
militancy with Pakistan army policy, there arose the possibility of
the sharing of nuclear weapons capability. Terrorism had assumed
new and more terrifying dimensions. It was in these circumstances
that General Pervez Musharraf assumed the leadership of the
Pakistan government. Not only did the future of Pakistan hang in
the balance, but the future of the subcontinent, the extended
region, and indeed the world would be affected by this latest
Pakistan army coup.

The Musharraf factor

Born in 1943 in India, Pervez Musharraf was a member of an
educated Syed family residing in Allahabad. His father, Musharraf-
ud-Din, was a long-term professional in the Indian civil service,
who following the partition of the subcontinent moved the family
to Pakistan, where he served in the new Pakistan diplomatic
service. He retired in 1974. Musharraf’s educated mother was an
official in the International Labor Organization until 1987. Pervez
received his education at St. Patrick’s School in Karachi, and
subsequently Foreman Christian College in Lahore. He entered
the Pakistan Military Academy at Kakul in 1961 and was
commissioned an artillery officer in 1964. Musharraf led his
troops in the Khem Karan, Lahore, and Sialkot sectors during the
1965 war with India and was decorated for heroism. After the war
he volunteered for the Special Services Group of elite commandos,
spending seven years with the force. Active in the 1971 war with
India, he rose to the rank of Company Commander in a commando
battalion. An expert in self-propelled artillery, he was later
promoted to Brigadier and given command of an infantry brigade,
and later an armored division. In 1995 he was promoted to
Lieutenant-General and functioned in a variety of staff positions.
Connected to the Command and Staff College at Quetta and the
National Defense College in Rawalpindi, Musharraf was made
responsible for the advanced training of combat officers. Later,
he was appointed Director General Military Operations in the
Pakistan army’s General Headquarters. On October 7, 1998 he



266 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

was promoted to General and made Chief of the Army Staff. On
April 9, 1999 he was given the added responsibility of Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee.

Musharraf’s distinguished military career brought him to the
attention of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, but it was his mohajir
status that convinced him the General would be pliant and hence
subject to his will. Otherwise, there was nothing in Musharraf’s
record to indicate weakness or subservience. A disciplined soldier,
Musharraf always demonstrated loyalty to the chain of command.
He served faithfully under Ayub and Yahya as well as Zia. He also
accepted the return to civilian-led government in 1972 and again
in 1988. He was not known as a dabbler in politics. His
professional bearing had brought him to the highest rank in the
Pakistan army and it was anticipated he would complete his term
as COAS and retire to civilian life in November 2001. Destiny,
however, ruled otherwise. The Kargil fiasco and Sharif’s grab for
absolute power had targeted the General, who responded with the
assistance of other commanding officers who did not want to see
another of their own humiliated and stripped of his authority. Nor
did they want the director of the ISI, much their junior, to succeed
to the army’s highest post. Musharraf was obviously the choice of
a coterie of generals now opposed to the Prime Minister. The
COAS responded to this crisis as he had to the others during his
long career, with firmness and dedication.

However, Musharraf did not declare martial law. The 1973
constitution was suspended but not abrogated. President Rafiq
Tarar was permitted to remain as head of state but was confined to a
ceremonial role. Musharraf contented himself with the unique title
of Chief Executive and he assumed all the responsibility for
managing government policy. The state of emergency declared by
the Prime Minister in 1998 was allowed to stand, but the political
parties were permitted to function as normal. The press too was
notified it was free to publish criticism so long as it did not
undermine the Chief Executive’s authority or threaten the security
of the country. The judiciary was sanctioned to operate in
accordance with its self-determined schedules and no military
tribunals were contemplated. The provinces, however, came under
the direction of governors appointed from the military services or
from retiredmilitary personnel. Balochistan was made an exception



The Politics of Terrorism 267

when a former chief justice of theHigh Court was made governor of
that province. Overall, the armed forces remained in their
conventional roles and the country’s civil servants administered
public affairs.

Besides from the Chief Executive’s office the only other unique
arrangement was the formation of a National Security Council
composed of the commanding officers of the different services,
and a federal cabinet that reported to Musharraf as the head of
government. Musharraf and his colleagues were quick to put
Pakistanis on notice that elections would not be held for the
foreseeable future. All efforts, Musharraf declared, would be
centered on maintaining law and order, restoring national morale,
balancing rival provincial interests, and reviving an economy
devastated by illicit practices and blatant corruption. Musharraf
also promised administrative reform, the strengthening of local
self-government, and punishment of those who had violated the
public trust. In a manner reminiscent of the caretaker government
of Moen Qureshi, Musharraf was determined to expose those who
had exploited their positions to accumulate private wealth. Tax
evaders and those in arrears on bank loans or failing to pay for
public services were ordered to pay what they owed or face the
consequences.

Nawaz Sharif and his brother, Shabaz, were singled out along
with several other officials. They were accused of actions
detrimental to the country. Treason, engaging in criminal
conspiracy, and aircraft hijacking were some of the major charges
brought against the former Prime Minister and his colleagues.
Nawaz was accused of making war on the country and initially
was brought before the Anti-Terrorism Court that he himself had
established. The fate of the Muslim League leader hung in the
balance. Sensing a repeat of Bhutto’s trial and execution,
numerous governments around the world questioned the military’s
actions in not only deposing elected officials but threatening them
with death. The United States government was especially exercised
over Sharif’s ouster. Washington had received assurances from the
Prime Minister that Pakistan would sign the Comprehensive Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty. The Americans had also been trying to prompt
Sharif to find and arrest Osama bin Laden. They had resisted
Indian demands that Pakistan be placed on the State Department’s



268 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

terrorist list and Nawaz Sharif had pledged his cooperation in
identifying and neutralizing terrorist organizations. These activities
as well as the war on drug trafficking seemed jeopardized by the
army takeover, and considerable efforts were directed to getting
Musharraf to back down and allow Nawaz to return to his post.

Musharraf, however, was not about to yield to foreign pressure.
Even the suspension of Pakistan’s membership in the Common-
wealth, and the European Union’s condemnation of the Pakistan
army for again interfering in the country’s politics were brushed
aside. In less than two months the critics acknowledged the futility
of their complaint and withdrew some of the sanctions imposed
on the military government. The Indian government was the
exception. With Kargil a fresh memory and Musharraf’s role in
the campaign indisputable, New Delhi refused to abandon its
criticism. Believing the army coup signaled a worsening of
relations between the two countries, New Delhi declared the
situation in Pakistan a threat to peace for the entire region.
Anticipating an intensification of guerrilla actions in Kashmir,
India warned Pakistan that any threat to its security would be
answered with the full force of the Indian armed forces. It was
India’s pressure that had forced Pakistan’s suspension from the
Commonwealth, and a meeting of the South Asia Association for
Regional Cooperation scheduled for Kathmandu in November
also was postponed at the request of the Indian government.

Despite the criticism at home and abroad, Musharraf settled to
his task as Pakistan’s Chief Executive. The Pakistan Muslim
League and the Pakistan People’s Party, in the absence of their main
leaders, decided to limit their competitive rhetoric and instead
found sufficient agreement to ally their parties in what they called
a “Grand Democratic Alliance.” In an alliance of weakness the
political parties sought ways to protect their organizations in the
face of strong executive measures. In the meantime the trial of
Nawaz Sharif went forward. Although the court decided to release
the others involved in the alleged conspiracy, Nawaz was found
guilty and his death sentence was commuted to twenty-five years’
imprisonment. The Supreme Court, not unexpectedly, ruled the
army takeover a lawful act. However, the court insisted Musharraf
could not remain in power indefinitely. His government was
ordered to hold elections that would reinstate the national and



The Politics of Terrorism 269

provincial legislatures no later than October 2002. The General
did not contest that order.

Musharraf’s public statements continued to justify the army
putsch, insisting there had been almost no advance planning and
that his colleagues had reacted to the Prime Minister’s initiatives.
Rumors, however, continued to circulate that the army had moved
to oust Sharif to deflect public attention from the Kargil incident.
The generals nonetheless cast aside all criticism. Musharraf’s
argument was that the army had responded to national need and
had thwarted a plan to impose a dictatorship on the country. By
protecting Musharraf, the generals had also preserved the military
tradition. This also meant insuring the country’s security and
safeguarding its nuclear stockpile. The Prime Minister’s imperious
behavior, his chameleon-like approach to politics, had made him a
totally untrustworthy guardian of the country’s major assets.
Moreover, his mismanagement of public policy, the virtual ruin of
the economy, and the threat posed to the country’s basic freedoms
could not go unanswered.

Musharraf drew support from the Islamist parties that had
opposed the visit to Pakistan of the Indian Prime Minister, Atal
Behari Vajpayee, in February 1999. Nawaz and Vajpayee had
issued a Lahore Declaration that called on their forces to relax
their vigilance in Kashmir. Nawaz was condemned by Islamist
organizations for extending the invitation to the Indian leader and
for agreeing to such a declaration. He also was accused of
betraying the Kashmiri people. A number of army commanders
shared these sentiments. By removing Sharif, Musharraf had
knowingly appeased the Islamists, as well as the hawks in the army
hierarchy. He also had boosted the work of the ISI operating in
conjunction with Islamic militants in the disputed territory. With
Nawaz in prison, Benazir in exile in Dubai, and the leader of the
MQM isolated in London, Musharraf found willing allies among
the Islamists, especially the Jamaat-i-Islami. He also was assured
of a lessening of street demonstrations and a relatively free hand to
promote his reform program.

The failed campaign in Kargil, however, continued to stalk the
General. The operation was launched after Vajpayee’s visit, and
Nawaz’s protestation that his government did not have advance
word about the action was almost believable. The attack was



270 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

supposedly mounted to deny Indian forces the use of the Vale–Leh
road in the high mountain region that connects with the Siachin
Glacier, a venue for sustained Indian–Pakistani skirmishing. For a
brief period Indian troops were cut off from their supply base in
Srinigar. Indian forces also suffered significant casualties when they
were caught by surprise. Islamabad reported the campaign was the
work of Kashmiri freedom fighters, but New Delhi gave a different
account. Charging the use of regular Pakistan army units, the
Indians did not rule out the presence of militant Islamists, but they
were convinced the entire operation was the work of the Pakistan
ISI, which, they said, had Musharraf’s complete backing. New
Delhi therefore reinforced its contingents in the area. It also
threatened Islamabad with a wider war.

Nawaz had continued to insist his government was not privy to
the action, but in the tense circumstances the Prime Minister flew
to Washington for a meeting with President Clinton. On his return,
he learned that the Indians had successfully countered the attack
and he ordered the withdrawal of all Pakistani forces. Although it
was not known how Musharraf viewed the pullback, many of his
commanders were unhappy with the Prime Minister’s order.
The Kargil adventure, however, came to an abrupt end. India
again had demonstrated its resolve as well as a capacity to defend
its position. In Pakistan, however, the blame game was only
beginning. The Kargil episode had ruptured relations between the
civilian government and the generals. It also had unleashed
the omnipresent fanatics among the religious-political orders, who
were now even more eager to take up the battle with New Delhi.

Musharraf had isolated the major political parties, had
neutralized their leaders, but had also allowed himself to become
intimate with formerly fringe Islamic elements. The character of
the Musharraf takeover, allowing parties to function, had opened
the political field to the more extreme political orders while
limiting it for others. Nawaz Sharif’s fall from power, instead of
providing greater opportunities to the national parties, had
marked the decline of secular politics and conferred legitimacy
on Islamist groups from Afghanistan to Kashmir. New Delhi cited
this development and comments were rampant about the further
Talibanization of Pakistan. Qazi Hussain Ahmed, leader of the
Jamaat-i-Islami, and Maulana Fazlur Rahman, mentor to the



The Politics of Terrorism 271

Jamiat-i-Ulama-i-Islam, were jubilant, and the Indian protests
only galvanized their efforts. Wanting no settlement with India,
they pressured Musharraf to ignore the criticism leveled against
his regime by the United States, Britain, and the European Union.

Musharraf was not a welcome figure in Washington or Europe.
He traveled little beyond Pakistan during his first year in power,
journeying only to New York City in the autumn of 2000 to join in
the millennium session of the United Nations General Assembly.
Even on that occasion he failed to engage in any substantive
discussions. Scheduled to meet with Bangladesh’s Prime Minister,
Hasina Wajid, he canceled the meeting after learning that her
agenda would question the return to military government in
Pakistan. Bangladesh also sought a public apology from the
Pakistan government for atrocities committed by the Pakistan army
during the 1971 civil war. Musharraf was not prepared to mend
fences, however, and he left New York as quietly as he had arrived.
Moreover, the chill in U.S.–Pakistan relations had been acknowl-
edged in March 2000 when President Clinton spent a full week in
India but barely more than a few low-profile hours in Pakistan.

Musharraf’s isolation from the outer world did not cause
distress among the Islamists. The Taliban had opened a new
offensive against the one significant force still denying the
fundamentalists total control of Afghan territory. The Northern
Alliance of Ahmad Shah Masud continued to battle against great
odds. Moreover, the Taliban now could count upon the support
of Pakistani troops as well as al-Qaeda recruits. By the summer of
2000 it appeared that total victory was in sight for the Emirate
of Afghanistan. The success of Taliban arms, however, had also
caused distress in the newly independent Central Asian republics,
and they now implemented more rigid dictatorial policies to
counter Islamist penetration and influence. Efforts also were made
to assist the Northern Alliance from Uzbekistan, and even Iran
stepped up its aid to the Masud forces as well as the opposition in
western Afghanistan. With concern growing about the power of
the Taliban, and its spreading influence through alliance with bin
Laden’s al-Qaeda, only Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and the United
Arab Emirates recognized the regime of Mullah Omar. Global
pressure therefore was placed on Musharraf to rein in the Pakistan
army’s role and especially the ISI.



272 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Pakistan’s sustained support for the austere religious order in
Afghanistan had opened divisions in the Muslim world. The few
Muslim countries that Musharraf visited in 2000 voiced this
concern. He had to manage criticism from both Turkey and
Malaysia, who questioned the course taken by the Musharraf
government, notably its support of the jihadis and the violent
religious extremists both in and outside his country. Musharraf
discovered he could not simultaneously promote secular demo-
cratic reforms and this more violent form of Islamization. Finally
acknowledging his balancing act could not work, he was forced to
contend with social conditions long neglected by his predecessor
regimes. Moreover, Pakistani youth in substantial numbers were
attracted to the religious-political organizations and Pakistan’s
high birth rate had caused their ranks to swell. The undereducated
and unemployed were also willing recruits for the jihadists.

The religious schools expanded during the Zia years. Supported
by Saudi Arabia, and to some extent by other Gulf states, schools
had drawn alienated and disenfranchised young people to their
doors and they were not turned away. Moreover, the growth of the
madrassahs was in stark contrast to the scant attention given to
secular education, and the overall decay in Pakistan’s secondary
schools, colleges, and universities. The religious schools, more-
over, had links with the Taliban and al-Qaeda, and they not only
attracted Pakistani youth but also drew students inclined towards
fundamentalism from Muslim as well as non-Muslim countries.
Saudi Wahhabism was spread by these more conservative schools
of Islamic jurisprudence. For Muslim youth discouraged by the
course of events, denied economic goals, limited in social
expression, Islam appeared a welcome path from their otherwise
frustrating and more secular environment. Here too was a
breeding ground for the army of al-Qaeda and Osama bin Laden,
who had developed a reputation as a folk hero, especially
following the U.S. missile attack on some of his camps in
Afghanistan.

Musharraf therefore had little to celebrate in the millennium
year. Pakistan’s economy was abysmal and showed little signs of
improvement. The huge external debt all but negated the country’s
gross domestic product and attempts to slow the inflationary
spiral were still frustrated by wide-scale corruption in the market



The Politics of Terrorism 273

place. Foreign investment had been frightened off following the
1998 nuclear tests, and the economic sanctions imposed following
that event were still more or less in place. And although
Musharraf could point to greater self-sufficiency in agricultural
production, the manufacturing sector, so heavily dependent on
outside sources of demand, suffered from lack of international
interest. The International Monetary Fund, however, mindful of
an economic meltdown, indicated that restrictions on loans to
Pakistan might be eased as a consequence of the government’s
demonstration of willingness in 2000 to repay a portion of its
foreign debt. Unable to gain access to more sophisticated financial
circles, Pakistan remained dependent on countries like Saudi
Arabia, and on Pakistanis abroad with their remittances to
families and friends. Pakistan’s military establishment, however,
its extension into Afghanistan, and its overall needs in ruling a
country shaken by sustained violence, demanded far more in the
way of resources. The staggering costs of a government that could
not find peace either at home or abroad did not add up to a
successful economic recovery.

Political evolution and revolution

Pakistan began 2001 much as it had ended 2000, virtually alone,
save for its ventures in Afghanistan and its sustained test of India’s
capacity to hold the line in Kashmir. Domestically, the country was
awash in violence, with both targeted and random acts of terror
taking a toll of the largely innocent civilian population. Foreigners
too had never been far from the violence. The intensification of the
Islamist movements and their jihadi goon squads seemed to
parallel the rising number of assaults on Pakistan’s foreign
community. Musharraf, however, continued to speak of his
democratic objectives for the country. Commemorating the first
anniversary of the coup in October 2000, the Chief Executive
reiterated his noble quest by noting the regime’s achievements
during the past year. His government, he said, had improved civil–
military relations, had purged and punished corrupt officials, had
demanded honesty in all transactions, had kept the faith with a
free press, and had given Pakistan a new profile among the world’s
nations. The latter claim was almost comical given Pakistan’s



274 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

growing reputation for indiscriminate attacks on the weakest
members of society. Musharraf, however, ignored that condition.
The profile of which he spoke was Pakistan’s status as a nuclear
power, which, in his thinking and that of his compatriots was a
very notable accomplishment. Therefore, the Chief Executive
called upon Pakistanis to celebrate with him and to face the future
with positive resolve. But his platitudinous speeches could not
conceal the country’s severe economic dislocation, his own lack of
political legitimacy, or the military government’s connection with
the chief cause of public disorder, namely the fundamentalists and
jihadis who masked their activities in the guise of Islamic purifiers.

Musharraf and his supporting cast of generals and technocrats
were still sorting out their options in a country that had long
rejected governance from a distant central government. People
were more inclined to follow the dictates of local authorities. The
centralization of power was always perceived as overbearing,
corrupt, and alien. Repeated efforts to overcome the preference
for localized politics, prompted a variety of reforms that were
never embraced by those who believed there was more to lose than
gain from any of the proposed policies. In this environment
Pakistan’s latest rulers searched for but could not find an answer
to the question of appropriate government. Moreover, not given to
innovative experimentation, successive governments repeated
what others had done before them. Thus similar leaders with
similar ideas and mannerisms, with similar inhibitions and
arguments, sustained their influence over the body politic. In fact,
leaders proved more durable than institutions. Nevertheless, the
passing of a particular leader also meant the discarding of
whatever might be associated with his or her rule. Whether Basic
Democracies or One Unit, parity formulas or federalism, Islamic
socialism or separate electorates, all became relics of history in the
search for national identity.

Reinventing government was not a Pakistani penchant. Two
models were expressed at the moment of Pakistan’s creation and
neither was altered with the passage of time. Parliamentary
government dominated one mode of thought; the other was the
quest for the Islamic state. Successive governments were forced to
try to combine the two goals, no matter how impossible the task.
Moreover, failure to achieve the ideal system did not mean never



The Politics of Terrorism 275

trying again. So it was with Musharraf, who, for all his democratic
discourse, continued to associate himself with the Muslim clerics.
The clerics had to play at parliamentary politics just as much as the
more secular politicians had to bolster their Muslim credentials.
It had been this way since Pakistan’s first days, and the only
difference more than fifty years later was the Islamists’s greater
political leverage. If Musharraf was intent on building democracy
along parliamentary lines and also promoting a political system
the Islamists could identify with, his policies appeared to favor the
latter over the former.

In December 2000, Musharraf entered into a confidential
agreement with the former Prime Minister’s attorneys and
representatives which allowed the entire Sharif family to leave
Pakistan for exile in Saudi Arabia. Nawaz was released from
prison and flown to Riyadh. In departing, he agreed to remain in
Saudi Arabia for a minimum of ten years. Musharraf’s demonstra-
tion of compassion contrasted with the vindictiveness of Zia
ul-Haq, who had rejected all pleas to spare Zulfikar Ali Bhutto’s
life. The decision to let Nawaz go left Musharraf to contemplate
the political future without the Punjabi leader’s looming presence.
Moreover, the Chief Executive demonstrated he was not a foe of
the Pakistan Muslim League, but in fact wanted to give the
organization an opportunity to resurrect itself. The same attitude
did not hold for Benazir Bhutto’s Pakistan People’s Party. Unlike
the Muslim League, the PPP was too much associated with the
personality of Benazir Bhutto and the spirit of her father.
Representing a different calling, the PPP could not be fitted into
a design that embraced both parliamentary politics and Islamic
tradition. Musharraf attempted to forge alliances with secondary
leaders in the PPP, but, realizing they would have to betray their
leader, they rejected his advances. In so doing, they prevented any
revival of their party.

The only other major party in the country was Altaf Hussain’s
Muttahida Qaumi Movement. Altaf Hussain’s permanent exile
in Britain, however, meant the MQM again would be denied its
principal guide and mentor. In the absence of his leadership the
MQM had to content itself with a major role in Karachi politics.
Of the minor parties, the only genuinely secular organization
was the Awami National Party (ANP), which had passed from



276 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Wali Khan to his son Asfand. The ANP had lost much of its
appeal on the frontier as a consequence of its anti-Taliban
posture. Unlike its former allies among the Islamist orders, the
ANP rejected associations with the Emir of Afghanistan and this
left Asfand with a very minor role in frontier politics. The ANP
defection, however, allowed Musharraf to ingratiate himself
with Maulana Fazlur Rahman and Maulana Sami-ul-Haq,
leaders of the major Islamist factions of the Jamiat-i-Ulama-i-
Islam in the NWFP.

For a soldier who had not engaged in politics before October
1999, by the early months of 2001 Musharraf had demonstrated a
political adroitness that was cause for worry among the
conventional politicians. Musharraf authorized the holding of
local council elections and, except for of the MQM, the parties did
not prevent their members from contesting the available seats. The
success of this venture also convinced the Chief Executive it was
time to discard his ambiguous role and assume the title associated
with the powers he actually held. Rafiq Tarar was eased out of his
position as ceremonial President and in July 2001 Musharraf
assumed the presidency and merged his powers with that office.
Although nothing was said about the return to the viceregal
tradition, it was clearly too ingrained in the Pakistani ethos to
expect that the authoritarian tradition would be ignored. With
Supreme Court sanction, Musharraf had made himself both head
of state and head of government. So anticipated was the event that
little criticism was heard from either the politicians or the Press.
Declaring he had assumed the presidency to give support to the
democratic process, Musharraf cited the success of the local
council elections and his intention to hold nationwide elections for
a new parliament and provincial legislatures much as the Supreme
Court had recommended. It could be inferred that Musharraf
believed all the political elements would be in place by October
2002 when those elections were to be held.

Antecedents to September 11

Building democracy in a country devoted to religious tradition has
been a problem in numerous states. The founding fathers of the
United States constitutional system acknowledged the problem in



The Politics of Terrorism 277

eighteenth-century Europe and it was their judgment that only by
a strict separation of church from state was democracy attainable.
Democracy was seen as a give and take of ideas and views. To live
democratically meant accepting thoughts and utterances that did
not always coincide and might sometimes be in conflict with one’s
understanding of specific religious commandments. Moreover,
religion, unlike democratic expression, was not subject to
compromise, and rather than rule out one’s interpretation and
practice of faith to please another, it was deemed best to allow all
people to worship and believe as they wished without any
interference from the state. This left the state to function not as an
extension of spiritual expression, but as an instrument of common
good, embracing all people under its jurisdiction. Unlike the piety
of the religious order, the state was a legal structure that
acknowledged no faith except the preservation of the nation.
Pakistan emerged as an independent state with this general
understanding. But the Pakistan Movement, the call to Muslims to
unite behind the Muslim League’s demand for a separate state,
would not have been successful had the leaders of the movement
insisted their goal was the creation of a secular system. The Indian
National Congress had represented the cause of secularism and it
was not secularism that Jinnah’s followers wanted for Pakistan.
Therefore, whereas India emphasized its formation as a secular
state, the leaders of Pakistan, with perhaps the exception of
Jinnah, muted such an idea. Pakistan’s constitutional record is a
poor one, but one matter is clear in each of its constitutional
documents: the country was formed for Muslims and was to be
guided by Muslim practices. Democracy was implied but it was
never made the dominant feature.

Pakistanis were never exposed to philosophical debate about the
merits of the democratic state versus the Islamic state. Jinnah was
more Lockean than Jeffersonian in that he encouraged tolerance,
not the parting of religion from state governance. But after him,
no political leader truly emphasized toleration, let alone the
separation of church and state. There is no body of political theory
in Pakistan that explores the subject. Scholars were reluctant to
broach the matter in public and politicians failed to see the value
of such discourse. Thus, Pakistanis were left without a clear
definition for their state and were forced to find explanation in



278 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

their individual lives or through the voices of the more articulate
literati. Moreover, the repeated failure of the politicians to satisfy
citizens’ expectations left little room for public flights of fancy.
Few questioned their circumstances and the vast majority simply
followed the forces set in train by society’s leaders. It should come
as no surprise therefore that the Islamists should have emerged as
a potent force, or that they should vent their long and deeply held
beliefs in the direction of political objectives. Pakistan may not
have been the goal of the Islamists in the years leading up to the
partition of the subcontinent, but Pakistan became a reality, and it
seemed only right to the men of deep faith that its evolution
should be defined in Islamic not democratic terms. Musharraf was
challenged by this juxtaposition of faith and secular practice. So
too were all his predecessors, but no one before him confronted
the specific issues that impacted on Pakistan in 2001.

The events that swept the Shah from power in 1979 were only
somewhat peculiar to Iran. A secular monarch prevailed over a
secular if autocratic system until such time as the forces of Islamic
revolution overwhelmed his once vaunted monarchy and brought
forth a new order centered on religious experience. The clash of
secular and religious forces was as predictable as the outcome. So
too was the expansion of the Iranian experience to include the full
range of Muslim nations. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
followed within months of the Shah’s ouster, an invasion little
understood at the time, but organized to prevent the spread of
revolutionary Islamic teaching to Central Asia. Afghanistan, at
first considered the prize, was actually the pawn in a new great
game, only this one was aimed to keep an Islamic tide from
welling up and sweeping through the cultures of the Soviet
Muslim republics. The men in the Kremlin who considered
themselves the guardians of autocracy did not miscalculate their
role in Afghanistan. Rather, they failed to predict Pakistan’s
reaction, or the American decision to supply its then alienated
former ally with substantial military assistance. Moreover,
Moscow never took the measure of the ISI, or foresaw the melding
of ISI and CIA operations in the Afghan interior. The Soviets
counted on a short, limited war, but the Islamabad–Washington
decision to use Islam as a weapon against them baffled the
Kremlin leaders and ultimately forced the Soviets’ retreat. Neither



The Politics of Terrorism 279

American military supplies nor Pakistani determination was alone
responsible for the eventual outcome. All the military supplies
provided would have been wasted (note the collapse of the
Kuomintang despite heavy American assistance) had it not been
Islamabad’s strategy, with American concurrence, to replicate the
passion of Khomeini’s Islamic revolution in the Afghan war
against the Red Army.

That strategy insinuated Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence
Directorate directly into Afghan affairs. Pakistan could not simply
remain passive as Afghan refugees flooded the country. Britain had
taught the merits of a “Forward Policy” in defense of the
subcontinent and the Pakistanis adopted that policy as their own.
Since they were not in a position to confront Moscow directly, the
use of clandestine forces was the only option and the ISI was
trained and equipped to operate in Afghanistan as a surrogate for
the regular army. The ISI, organized in 1948, had been shaped by
the Ayub military government and was made responsible to the
three major services, including the army, through the Joint Chiefs
of Staff Committee. In 1975, Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto,
by executive order, created a political cell within the intelligence
unit which brought it directly under the control of the chief
executive. The Prime Minister used the ISI, as he used his more
personal Federal Security Force, to spy on the political opposition
and to make it impossible for them to challenge the authority of
his government. Matters of national security, however, particu-
larly those dealing with force levels, external intelligence, and
military strategy, were channeled through the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Committee. This division of function followed into the Zia
administration and beyond. During Zia’s rule, and especially
during the several years of martial law, the ISI reported directly to
the President, who doubled as Chief Martial Law Administrator.
Up to the end of martial law in 1985, Zia used the ISI as he saw fit.
After 1985, however, Zia’s decision to unleash the politicians
provided the ISI with the opportunity to skirt the President’s
authority. Moreover, the war in Afghanistan had taken a new turn
with the assistance provided by the CIA, and the latter’s intimacy
with an expanded ISI.

Inter-Services Intelligence and CIA officials acknowledged the
power of religious commitment and a decision was taken to supply



280 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

what were deemed the more spiritually committed forces among
the resistance fighters. Thus Gulbadin Hekmatyar and his Hizb-i-
Islami was an early candidate for assistance. A leader of Islamic
revolution in the years of the Afghan monarchy, Hekmatyar had
ties to the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood and Egyptian Islamic
Jihad. Provided shelter in Pakistan during the short-lived Daud
republic, Hekmatyar’s connections in Pakistan were mainly with
the Jamaat-i-Islami, a group favored by Zia ul-Haq. The Pakistani
President therefore, apparently without CIA objection, made it
possible for Hekmatyar to receive an estimated sixty-five percent of
U.S. military assistance and financial aid. More secular Afghan
leaders like Masud and Ismail Khan also saw a need to link forces
with ISI, but they were treated circumspectly and received
comparatively little of the American-proffered assistance. Abdul
Hagh and other more dubious mujahiddin leaders refused to
become instruments of Pakistani-directed policy and they had no
choice but to look elsewhere for their support.

After Soviet acceptance of the U.N.-mediated withdrawal
agreement in 1988, the ISI took on the appearance of a
paramilitary force and was immediately involved in the formation
of an Afghan interim government. Its powers enhanced by its
success and the number of agents and military personnel in its
command, it also was relatively independent of the army command
structure. This became even more apparent following Zia’s death
in October 1988. The Director General of ISI was always a
uniformed officer but the army’s COAS had little influence over
him. Moreover, Zia’s successor as COAS, General Aslam Beg,
became a suspect in Zia’s death. General Beg also had reason to
believe ISI was complicit in the destruction of the President’s
aircraft. Officially, the loss of Zia’s plane was attributed to
sabotage and the government was content to point to the Soviet
KGB and the Afghan KHAD as the joint culprits. Thus, the ISI
escaped scrutiny and was left free to continue its intrigue in
Afghanistan. General Beg, however, experienced considerable
difficulty in directing the Pakistan army.

ISI operations in Afghanistan also fueled the conflict between
Pakistani and Iranian interests. The ISI had links with Saudi
Arabia and thereby became embroiled in the rivalry between
Riyadh and Teheran, each seeking leadership of the Islamic



The Politics of Terrorism 281

revolution. This contest provoked clashes between Afghan Sunnis
and Shiites which spilled over into Pakistan, where sectarian
disturbances had become an everyday occurrence. Sunni–Shiite
conflict negated cooperation among the Afghan mujahiddin and
prevented them from challenging the Communist government in
Kabul after the Red Army withdrew. Inter-Services Intelligence
actions actually impeded the creation of an interim government
and allowed the Najibullah regime to remain in Kabul an
additional four years. What the Afghans lost, however, the ISI
gained. By this time the ISI had a force of thousands and the
distribution of international aid became a major responsibility of
the intelligence agency. The ISI approved or rejected requests for
bases in Pakistan. It also determined which Afghan politicians
would be favored and which denied, thereby prompting or
aggravating rivalries that led to serious internecine conflicts.
Directly or indirectly, the ISI was responsible for the assassination
of Afghan officials, and for many the Pakistan ISI had assumed the
role of a para-Afghan government.

Iran’s desire to compete with the Pakistan ISI only further
destabilized the country. Shiite Afghans from the Hazarajat central
region of Afghanistan had resisted Iranian influence, but because
they had difficulty in procuring Western aid, Iran continued to be a
source of assistance. Iran’s Sazaman-e-Italaat, the government
intelligence service, Islamic Revolutionary Guard, and Ministry of
the Interior also became involved in the attempt to shape
Afghanistan’s destiny. Afghan commanders tried to distance
themselves from both the Pakistanis and the Iranians. Some
mujahiddin leaders formed the National Commanders Shura
(NCS) to coordinate their activities. The NCS denied the ISI a
place in their organization; they also rejected an Iranian presence.
The Afghan commanders were especially disturbed by an ISI plan
that would have the mujahiddin forces make a combined frontal
assault on the Najibullah-based Kabul government. Instead, the
NCS authorized an incremental strategy that would enable them
to secure the provinces and regions, thus isolating the Communist
regime in the capital. The ISI plan, if implemented, would have
involved heavy casualties and would have weakened rather than
strengthened the Afghan commanders’ forces. Suspicious that the
ISI wanted a weak and divided mujahiddin army in order to press



282 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

its own interests, the NCS stuck to its own plan and announced its
intention to divide Afghanistan into nine separate zones, each with
its own regional administration. The grand purpose of the NCS
strategy was an Afghanistan in which the Afghans controlled their
own destiny.

Not surprising, the ISI refused to accept the NCS plan and its
agents organized defections from the NCS with Hekmatyar among
the first to break ranks. With assistance from the ISI, Hekmatyar
organized a rival Laskar-e-Eissar (Army of Sacrifice), which
quickly opened a military campaign and succeeded in capturing
the strategic border town of Khost. The NCS soon found itself
riddled with dissent. Masud, however, rallied his Northern
Alliance and, with Dostum’s decision to join ranks, Najibullah
die-hards also jumped to the Alliance. The Northern Alliance
emerged as a force determined not only to replace the Communist
regime in Kabul but also to stem the expanding influence of the
ISI. The main struggle now pitted pro-ISI against anti-ISI forces.
The combined force of the Northern Alliance and Dostum, with
the help of Communist defectors, swept down from the north and
quickly entered and captured Kabul against minimal resistance.
They captured Najibullah as he was preparing to flee to India. The
ISI force, led by General Assad Durani, was furious, first at being
refused a place in the National Commanders Shura, and second
when the northern force led by Masud and Dostum denied Kabul
to Hekmatyar’s warriors moving in from Khost. It is important to
note that Kabul was entered in relative tranquility and the city was
secured quickly. Following Kabul’s capture by Masud’s Northern
Alliance, the other Peshawar-based leaders of the mujahiddin,
with the exception of Hekmatyar, agreed to journey to Kabul,
where an interim government was established without ISI
assistance on April 29, 1992.

Following the alliance between northern and eastern Afghans,
ISI’s pan-Islamic policies were integrated in a new Pakistan foreign
policy. Pakistan needed a land bridge to the newly independent
Islamic republics of Central Asia. Masud and his Northern
Alliance blocked the way. Islamabad therefore rejected the interim
Kabul government before it could be established, and intrigued to
form another that conformed to Pakistan’s perceived national
interest. The ISI also continued to promote Hekmatyar and



The Politics of Terrorism 283

intrigued to destabilize the new government of Mujaddidi
Rabbani. Arguing the interim government aligned itself too
closely with Masud, Dostum, and Ismail Khan, Islamabad
provided the ISI with carte blanche to destabilize the new Afghan
administration. Pakistan feared the interim government would
open Afghanistan to advances from New Delhi, an echo of
conditions prevailing before the Soviet invasion. Given the new
government’s anti-Pakistan bias, it was also seen as blocking
Pakistan’s interests in Central Asia. A related concern for Pakistan
was the possible revival of an Afghan claim to Pakhtunistan, in
Pakistan’s northwestern territory. The ISI therefore developed a
strategy that not only undermined the secular Afghan government,
but also nourished the Afghan Islamist movement. The key ISI
decision, however, was the formation of the Taliban and its
recruitment of Pakistanis as well as Afghans. By 1993 the Tehrik-i-
Taliban was a formidable force with direct ties to the Pakistan
army.

The rise of the Taliban coincided with the establishment of the
Clinton presidency. The new American President was advised to
scale back and ultimately remove the CIA presence from
Afghanistan. Najibullah had been defeated, Communism had
been overturned, and Washington thought it better for the
Afghans to work out their future without American involvement.
The departure of the Americans left the other outsiders – the
Pakistanis, Saudis, and Egyptians – to pursue their objectives
without Washington’s influence. Saudi efforts were joined to those
of the ISI: both were devoted to building a counter-force to the
mujahiddin interim government, which was falsely seen as
favoring Iran. Egyptian input involved expanding the ranks of
the Afghan Arabs (Arabs who joined the mujahiddin in the war
against the Soviet Union) and other Muslims associated with the
al-Qaeda of Osama bin Laden. Pakistan wanted an Afghanistan
dominated by loyal Pashtuns, and Islamabad directed Hekmatyar’s
forces, reinforced by the Taliban and Afghan Arabs, to march on
Kabul, where a bloody campaign was unleashed that destroyed
much of what was left of the Afghan capital. From a distance the
struggle for Kabul looked like an ethnic quarrel in which tribal
vendettas were more significant than the continued suffering of the
Afghan people. The war, however, was as much orchestrated as it



284 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

was spontaneous. The ISI had used Hekmatyar and the alliance of
jihadi and Islamist forces to deny the success of the interim
government. But this was only the first phase of a broader plan.

The Taliban was Islamabad’s answer to a third force between
the Pashtun Afghans and the non-Pashtun Afghans. Raised,
supported, and trained by the ISI and special forces of the
Pakistan army, the Taliban was made the instrument not only to
end the fighting in Afghanistan, but to bring the country under
Pakistani control. The Taliban was Afghan at its core, emerging
from the southern city of Kandahar and its environs, but
augmented by tribal Pashtuns from Pakistan’s frontier region, as
well as Afghan Arabs and other more distant Muslims drawn from
the Islamic world as far as Indonesia on the one side and Algeria
on the other. Taliban funding was supplied by Saudi Arabia and
the Gulf states. The Taliban was the instrument of an Islamic
renaissance, and it seemed to serve the interests of both Islamabad
and Riyadh. Religious schools had been established along the
Afghan–Pakistani frontier and in the Pakistani hinterland.
Primarily supported with Saudi money, these schools indoctrinated
their students in the tenets of an austere form of Islam and trained
them as warriors, reminiscent of the ghazis who had fought the
Byzantine Christian akritai in the march lands of the expanding
Islamic empire. It was the ghazis who established the Ottoman
Empire and spread their influence through Afghanistan to
medieval India. By 1994, Washington had all but accepted the
Taliban as a pacifying force, concerned with disarming the rival
tribes and restoring law and order to an Afghanistan desperately
in need of time to repair the damage of fifteen years of constant
warfare.

American support during the Reagan and Bush administrations
had heavily favored the more religious orders in Afghanistan.
Under the Clinton administration Washington again gave its
support to Pakistan’s inspired Islamic scholars. Clinton saw in the
Taliban an army of dedicated Muslims who had volunteered their
services to bring order out of chaos in the mountain country. The
Taliban’s righteous outlook and determination, it was assumed,
would end terrorism, stop the cultivation and trafficking of
narcotics, and unite the country under a nationally inspired regime
composed of selfless individuals. Needless to say, from a



The Politics of Terrorism 285

geopolitical viewpoint, the Taliban would also stymie Iranian and
Russian influence in Central Asia and open the region for
commercial development. High on the list of such commercial
activity was UNOCAL’s oil and gas pipeline complex through
Afghanistan. Although the Taliban were Islamic fundamentalists,
the Americans were convinced that Taliban fundamentalism was
very different from the political fundamentalism of Iran. There-
fore, when the Taliban stormed into Kabul in 1996, routing its
opposition, the United States believed that a stabilizing element
had been established in Afghanistan. Moreover, with Pakistani
and Saudi assistance the region could be expected to achieve a
level of tranquility and development not experienced in almost
two decades. Washington began to envisage the return of King
Zahir Shah and the prospect that a revived and stable Afghanistan
would open the larger region to growth and reconstruction.

What Washington had not foreseen was the opportunity a
Talibanized Afghanistan offered to a broad cross-section of
Muslims determined to end Western influence. The Taliban’s
success was buttressed by assistance from across the Islamic
world, including from Osama bin Laden, who had declared war
on the Saudi government and on the United States. A Saudi subject
who had been expelled from his country when he criticized royal
regime policy for allowing Western forces to operate in the
kingdom during the 1990–91 Gulf War, bin Laden had returned to
Afghanistan to help the Taliban consolidate their power. The
Pakistan ISI acknowledged bin Laden’s presence, accepted his
offer of financial assistance, and did nothing to prevent him from
attracting other Muslim fighters to Afghanistan, nor did they stop
him from constructing training camps and bases in the country.
Bin Laden became the catalyst for a network of Islamist militant
organizations that were in fact aided by the ISI. The training camp
of Al Badr was associated with the Khalid ibn-i-Walid that bin
Laden used for global operations. Another camp, the Muawia,
was of more interest to the ISI because it came under the direction
of the Harkat-ul-Ansar, a Kashmiri guerrilla organization. The
relationship between ISI, bin Laden, and the Taliban was
undeniable, but its portents were not fully realized until 1998
when bin Laden’s operatives in Tanzania and Kenya blew up the
American embassies in those two countries. The Clinton admin-



286 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

istration’s response to these assaults was the cruise missile strikes
on some of bin Laden’s training camps and the multi-million
dollar reward Washington offered for Osama bin Laden’s capture.
Believing the Afghans could be bought, the Clinton government
was surprised when there were no takers. Nor was there any
indication of bin Laden’s whereabouts.

The Pakistan ISI was too committed to its Afghan policy to
abandon it now. Pakistani governments led by Benazir Bhutto and
subsequently Nawaz Sharif were pressured unsuccessfully to yield
bin Laden or his lieutenants. Except for the arrest and extradition
of two terrorists, one connected with the 1993 bombing of the
New York City World Trade Center and the other with an attack
on CIA headquarters in Virginia, nothing was done about
al-Qaeda. Nor was Pakistan’s growing intimacy with Mullah
Omar, the self-proclaimed Emir of Afghanistan, reconsidered.
Taliban operations were allowed to intertwine with al-Qaeda’s
expanding legions and the spillover in Kashmir was evident in the
escalation of the violence there. As elusive as bin Laden proved to
be, Mullah Omar was an even more shadowy figure, refusing even
to be photographed, let alone appearing at public events.
Washington called upon the Emirate of Afghanistan, a state it
refused to recognize, to arrange for the extradition of bin Laden to
the United States, but the Taliban turned a deaf ear to the request.
The United States responded with sanctions. The United Nations
Security Council, at American urging, followed with limited
sanctions of its own. The Taliban, however, appeared to gain
strength from the publicity and the American pressure. Mullah
Omar was quoted as refusing to yield a Muslim to a non-Muslim
demand, no matter the alleged criminal offense. In May 2000,
President Clinton cited a bomb plot supposedly planned by
al-Qaeda to occur at the United States millennium celebrations.
Although that period passed without serious incident, the United
States government launched a multi-million dollar counter-
terrorism program aimed at fanatic Islamic organizations such
as al-Qaeda and the Taliban. In Pakistan, however, there was no
shift in policy or intention. Islamabad continued to see positive
results in the operations of the Taliban despite growing interna-
tional criticism of its violation of human rights, especially its
treatment of women.



The Politics of Terrorism 287

Although Pakistan participated in the Six-Plus-Two Conference
in July 1999, it had little interest in promoting the Afghanistan
peace proposals developed by the concerned nations. The
conference consisted of China, Iran, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, and Pakistan (Afghanistan’s six neighbors) plus
Russia and the United States. The conference called for an end
to military assistance to the Taliban and the northern legions that
continued to resist its rule. The Six-Plus-Two countries called for a
broad-based government, and meetings were held between the
Taliban and its opposition, but without satisfactory result. While
these negotiations were in train, supporters of the different groups
were assisting them behind the scenes with even heavier arms
shipments. From his residence in Rome, the long-exiled King
Zahir Shah was encouraged to participate in renewed peace
efforts. In December 1999, the King called for a world gathering
of Afghans to meet with him in Rome, a call supported by the
world’s major nations. The Taliban regime of Mullah Omar,
however, declined the invitation. Already committed to a program
that included al-Qaeda and other Islamist orders, and boosted in
their resolve by Saudi Arabia as well as Pakistan, the Taliban and
al-Qaeda leaders could not be deflected from their now
determined course to spread their radicalized Islamic vision to
other regions.

A summing up

Pakistan’s quest for democracy was compromised decades ago.
Politicians, bureaucrats, and soldiers all failed to deliver on their
promises. Successive frustrations, combined with the civil war
that caused the loss of East Pakistan, led to popular despair and
questioning that could only be answered by those who draw their
strength from such disasters. Religion is all pervasive in Pakistan
and religious leaders with political ambitions had fertile ground
in which to plant seeds of discord and rebellion. A demoralized
nation turned to Zulfikar Ali Bhutto after the loss of the
country’s eastern wing. They looked to Bhutto to lift their spirits
and to revitalize a country that had been defeated by a hated
enemy. Bhutto failed that test. He gave way to another General
who saw in Pakistanis a longing for something closer to their



288 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

genius and more workable than the oft spoken objective of an
alien form of democracy. Zia was vilified for his rule and his
method of governance, but his Islamization program proved
timely in giving voice to a country overcome by anomie.
Afghanistan’s plight confirmed the utility of Islamization, and
as it was used to bolster the resolve of the Afghan mujahiddin, so
too it reinforced the will of the most ardent Muslims of Pakistan,
who were now made to focus their attention on the liberation of
Kashmir. Afghanistan’s plight was linked with Pakistan’s post-
civil-war condition. Both countries sought to save their identities
as individual nations challenged by great powers. The two were
linked by Islamic tradition and each spawned political religious
organizations that were prepared to use any means to realize
their objectives.

The humiliated Pakistan armed forces found new strength
through the work of the Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate,
nurtured by General Zia to challenge the Soviet Union in
Afghanistan, as well as India in Kashmir. Pakistan enjoyed
logistic advantages in both areas which made those contests
different from the conflict in East Pakistan. Moreover, the ISI
could readily tap into those forces in Afghanistan, Kashmir, and
elsewhere where service in the name of God was a potent weapon.
Thus a marriage with the most militant of religious orders was
forged on both fronts, and particularly with those orders that
were prepared to undergo a protracted and costly struggle. For
the Islamists, the collapse of the Soviet incursion in Afghanistan,
and the subsequent implosion of the Soviet monolith, was a sign
from God that the cause pursued by righteous Muslims was true
and just. But the struggle was only half won when the Soviet
retreat proved to be not quite the end of the matter. Pakistan
needed to consolidate its victory in Afghanistan even if it meant
denying the Afghans their cherished objective, independence.
Kashmir had yet to be liberated from India, and the alliance
forged between elements of the Pakistan armed forces and Islamic
militant organizations was deemed to be the correct and only
strategy toward that end.

Afghanistan had never experienced rule by religious zealots.
Most of its history describes a people separated by tribal
experience, but nonetheless capable of remarkable codes of



The Politics of Terrorism 289

tolerance. Different religious orders, whether Christian, Hindu, or
Jewish, lived side by side with the majority Muslim population
and Sufi pedagogy assisted communities to accept the rituals and
ceremonies of other faiths. Buddhism enjoyed a degree of respect
and the ancient archaeological sites that were reminders of pre-
Islamic civilization were protected and appreciated as expressions
of human diversity. The Taliban, however, believed that anything
that deviated from the most conservative practice of Islamic
tradition was blasphemous and should be removed or destroyed.
What the Soviets began in shattering the social veneer of Afghan
society, the Taliban finished. The Taliban was not only a totally
new Afghan experience, it came very close to replicating the
Communist aim, albeit in fundamentalist Islamic character, of
re-engineering society.

The extreme form of Islam that was imposed on the Afghans
made them candidates for a transformation whose roots were to be
found in Saudi Arabia, and especially within the Egyptian Muslim
Brotherhood, which emanated from Cairo’s Al-Azhar University,
the principal institution for the training of Muslim clerics. Afghan
leaders like Hekmatyar, Rabbani, Rasul Sayyaf, and Sibqatollah
Mujaddadi had all attended the Cairo school and it was they who
formed the Afghan branch of the Muslim Brotherhood. Returning
to Afghanistan on the completion of their studies, they attempted
to break the hold that secularism had long imposed on the
country. Failing in their initial effort to destroy Mohammad
Daud’s republic, they took refuge in Pakistan and gained the
protection of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. These events provided Pakistan
with opportunities it would later seek to exploit.

The Soviet thrust into Afghanistan, and the threat it seemed to
pose to a Pakistan still reeling from the civil war and India’s role
in dismembering the country, made the linkage between the
Pakistan government and the Afghan Islamists an imperative of
Pakistan’s foreign policy. The Afghan mullahs called for a jihad
against the infidel, the monafiq, the one who would create
divisions among Muslims and thereby make war on God and His
community of believers. These ideas were perpetuated even after
the Soviet departure and were made more emphatic by those
determined to seize control of the devastated country. The brutal
internecine feuding, though tribal in character, was made to



290 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

appear endemic and traditional as well as uncompromising. A
clash of warlords was the general perception of the mayhem that
swept Afghanistan after the Soviet withdrawal. What in fact had
happened was quite different. With Pakistani assistance, the most
fanatic of Afghanistan’s religious leaders, joined now by fanatics
from the Middle East and across the Muslim world, unleashed an
assault on the traditional but secular elements of Afghan society.
The fundamentalists were determined to eliminate whomever
might be considered a rival and in the extended night of the long
knives they murdered the more noteworthy politicians, the
intellectuals and professionals, as well as the mujahiddin
commanders who had been instrumental in defending Afghanistan
from the Red Army.

Under the influence of the ISI, the Hizb-i-Islami of Hekmatyar
and the Jamiat-i-Islami of Rabbani became the principal agents of
terror. Those Afghans who could escape the carnage sought refuge
in distant countries, thus denuding Afghanistan of vital citizens
and setting the scene for the arrival and takeover of the Taliban.
Nor did the killing end after the Taliban victory. Abdul Ahad
Karzai, an Afghan politician who had found refuge in Pakistan,
continued the effort to reconcile the conflicting forces in his native
country. In 1999 he became the victim of an assassin. Bereft of its
leaders, Afghanistan was an easy target for the Taliban and its
allies. Except for the pocket of resistance represented by Ahmad
Shah Masud, the entire country appeared to be unified under the
Taliban Emirate. Taliban peace, however, was never meant to be
moderate and forgiving. Afghanistan had been hijacked by the
most extreme of Islamist militants. Assembled from distant places,
they had an unfinished agenda that included targets far removed
from Afghanistan. The Taliban’s purpose was to purify Afghan
soil, to transform the people of Afghanistan into model Muslims
even if that meant cruelties and behaviors incongruous in the
modern world, or even in Islamic tradition. And while the Taliban
set out to reinvent Islam and impose it on a hapless Afghan people,
their non-Afghan fanatics would carry the message of the new
Islam to the outside world. Bin Laden’s al-Qaeda was the principal
bearer of that message. Although the Saudi terrorist declared war
on the United States in 1998, he saw the first line of battle as being
in Pakistan, where Talibanization had merged with Islamization



The Politics of Terrorism 291

and where an army of believers was being primed to act at the
master’s beck and call.

As alien as the Taliban was to Afghanistan, it nonetheless
became the focus for a transformation of the Islamic world. Bin
Laden was the messenger of the new Islam, a defiant and all-
powerful representative of Muslim tradition capable of standing
up to the most formidable global forces, notably those represented
by the United States. Building upon the Mektab al-Khidmat
established by his fellow Saudi mentor on Afghanistan’s border
with Pakistan, bin Laden formed the al-Qaeda or “base” to be the
core institution in what was projected to be a long war with the
infidel Americans and those associated with them. Bin Laden
joined the Taliban as they conquered the region of Nangarhar
province where he had established his operations. Providing the
Taliban with several million dollars drawn from his personal
account, he was instantly made a member of the movement and
given responsibility for recruiting fighters from far away, some-
thing he had already done in the campaign against the Soviet
Union. In time bin Laden became the public face of Mullah Omar,
who preferred obscurity and whose interests seldom extended
beyond the Kandahar region. It was therefore bin Laden who
announced in 1998 the formation of the International Islamic
Front for Jihad. Included in this hydra-headed organization was a
litany of Islamic terrorist groups and cells. The Jamaat-al-Islamia
and Islamic Jihad from Egypt, Hezbollah in Lebanon, Hammas in
the Palestinian Gaza Strip, Harkat-ul-Mujahiddin and Lashkar-i-
Ansar in Pakistan, Abu Sayyaf in the Philippines, the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan, the Islamic Salvation Front in Algeria,
and al-Qaeda were the most prominent. The appeal of the jihadi
movement to Muslims in circumstances where they appeared to be
outnumbered or oppressed was impossible to overstate.

The Pakistani ISI was not oblivious to what was happening in
Afghanistan. How the ISI or the Pakistan government, under
Musharraf’s direction since October 1999, could have ignored the
more than twenty thousand non-Afghans trained in al-Qaeda
camps is impossible to fathom. How Pakistan could ignore the
thousands of its own countrymen who flocked to the Taliban and
al-Qaeda is another dimension of the same question. How the
Pakistan government could remain oblivious to the excesses of the



292 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Taliban, which they continued to recognize despite the known
atrocities committed in its name, can be explained only in terms of
fear. Nurturing Islamists had become a sine qua non for governing
Pakistan. For Pakistanis in and out of government, the question was
not how to thwart terrorism, but how to live with it. Appeasement
mixed with indifference and blended with self-interest was the
course taken by the Musharraf government. It can only be
concluded that having waded so far, the Pakistani government
now found it more difficult to retreat than to continue forward.
Pakistan still had a foreign policy to pursue. Afghanistan and
Central Asia remained high priorities in Islamabad, but so too was
the intifada in Kashmir, now fueled to a greater intensity by
al-Qaeda-supported Kashmiri groups like Jayash-i-Mohammad
and Lashkar-i-Tayyaba. The Musharraf government, like those
before it, was prepared to acknowledge the dangers of international
terrorism, but nevertheless insisted on separating the struggle in
Kashmir, no matter how violent, from that association. NewDelhi’s
claim that Pakistan was a terrorist state, that its role in Afghanistan
as well as its sustained support for the Kashmiri intifada established
Islamabad’s complicity in terrorist operations, was a continuing
subject of debate in Washington and in European capitals. But it
was not until September 11, 2001 that Pakistan’s connection to
worldwide terrorism became a critical concern.

Bibliography*
Abbas, Syed A., “Pakistan Coup: A Harbinger of Turmoil in the Near East

and South Asia,” unpublished manuscript, 2000.
Baxter, Craig and Kennedy, Charles, eds., Pakistan 1997, Boulder:

Westview, 1998.
Hoge, James F. and Rose, Gideon, eds., How Did This Happen?

Terrorism and the New War, New York: Public Affairs, 2001.
Malik, Iftikar, “Pakistan in 2000: Starting Anew or Stalemate?” Asian

Survey, 41 (1), 2001, pp. 104–15.
Malik, Iftikhar, “Pakistan in 2001: The Afghanistan Crisis and the

Rediscovery of the Frontline State,” Asian Survey, 42(1) January/
February 2002, pp. 204–12.

*Numerous internet sources were examined in drafting this chapter. See websites
and authors and writers consulted at the close of chapter 11.



The Politics of Terrorism 293

Nojumi, Neamatollah, The Rise of the Taliban in Afghanistan: Mass
Mobilization, Civil War, and The Future of the Region, New York:
Palgrave, 2002.

Talbott, Strobe, and Chanda, Nayan, eds., The Age of Terror: America
and the World after September 11, New York: Perseus, 2001.



10
CHOOSING SIDES

Much is made of international pressure in the formation of self-
governing political systems. Nevertheless there seems little that
external powers can do to determine whether a particular political
actor will become more or less autocratic, or more or less
democratic. A considerable amount of intellectual energy has gone
into the exercise of measuring one country’s influence upon
another. Studies have examined the relationship between the
country to be changed and the one supposedly doing the changing.
Little, however, has come from these efforts. So it is with Pakistan
and the foreign influences it has been exposed to.

The country that is said to have had the greatest influence on
Pakistani governance is the United States. Those exploring the
relationship are more likely to conclude that the Americans have
nurtured autocracy, not democracy. No state is an island unto
itself, and Pakistan’s history is full of instances where the United
States played a pivotal role at a critical time. It is therefore not
surprising that students of the subject have concluded that
Pakistan’s difficulty in establishing true democracy represents the
failure of Americans who could have done more to promote
democracy in Pakistan. The United States is said to be responsible
for the perpetuation of Pakistan’s viceregal tradition, for the long
periods of military rule, and the resulting atrophy in the
democratic process. Washington’s preference for military rulers

294



Choosing Sides 295

like Ayub Khan, Yahya Khan, and even Zia ul-Haq was
demonstrated again in its embrace of Pervez Musharraf, especially
after the calamitous events of September 11, 2001.

The utility of placing blame for a country’s domestic failures on
an alien power presents significant dilemmas. In reality, distant
powers, no matter how intrusive, cannot be held responsible for
the course a state chooses to follow. The complex character of the
state is seen in the relationships of the people who are its citizens.
Pakistanis have contributed to their own malaise, to their repeated
failure to define who and what they really are and what they
intend to become. It is so much easier to find fault with distant
forces than to come to grips with the misadventures that have led
many resident Pakistanis to conclude they live in a failed state.
A reluctance and even fear to discuss the nation’s conflicted ethos,
to achieve consensus on the path to be followed, is at the core of
the problem. Except for those who speak the language of division
and secession, who would seriously entertain the break up and the
disappearance of the Pakistani state, the obfuscation persists.
Pakistani identity, more than five decades after the state’s
founding, remains an elusive objective, and never more so than
in the present climate of social and political disorder.

Pakistan is a seedbed for extremists desperately seeking a role.
The extremist frame of mind does not dwell on the future of
Pakistani democracy. “Democracy,” like so many other artifacts
of Pakistan’s experience, is an alien expression empty of all
meaning for those not party to the political process. Furthermore,
those in a position to play the democracy game generally hail from
those segments of society touched by foreign experience. The
colonial authority dealt mostly with the land-holding caste and
the business element. Colonialism prompted the development of
bureaucratic, not political institutions, and the ties between the
ruling administrators and the feudal landlords were carefully
constructed to minimize stress and maximize obedience. Accep-
tance of the dominant landlord had a carryover effect that
permitted the magistrate or the civil service official to implement
the will of the Viceroy and, most significant, to maintain law and
order. Business interests were inclined to acknowledge the
fountainhead of power and to pay homage to its predictable style
of governance. Pakistan inherited this structure at independence,



296 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

and it was this very structure that provided the country with a
semblance of stability and decorum. The political party that
fought for an independent Pakistan had little in the way of
structure to substitute for the colonial legacy and after indepen-
dence the Muslim League remained dependent on the steel frame
of colonial administration.

Democracy was reduced to a contest between a Muslim League
and a bureaucratic system that both served and undermined each
other’s interests. All the energy in this dynamic centered on the
ability of the one to overcome the resistance of the other. Absent
from the scene was the citizenry, more the subjects of local leaders
than active participants in an evolving political process. A congeries
of rural folk, Pakistanis responded to the expectations of those
immediately around them, seldom to an abstract and distant
authority that was neither concerned with their day-to-day needs
nor sensitive to their cultures. Democracy therefore never entered
their thoughts or aspirations. Religious demands always meant
more to people with little if any exposure to a larger universe.
Although dependent on the landlord for bodily sustenance, the
rural poor found a voice in the rhetoric of the Muslim clerics who
lived among them. The language of Islam was the beginning and
the end of their experience. The masses answered to the Islamists,
not the politicians who seemed to care little about their day-to-day
needs. Thus, as politicians struggled with bureaucrats in a vain
attempt to promote their notion of democracy, the masses were
influenced by the ulema that articulated their concerns and guided
them. They did not seek progressive society, but spiritual revival
and righteous belief. Extremism therefore begins with the vast gulf
separating the sophisticated minority, with their quest for popular
self-government, and the common folk’s overriding need to do
God’s work. The two goals were never made compatible.

With the masses either forgotten, ignored, or taken for granted,
the so-called builders of democratic tradition failed to meet the
test of their own making. Moreover, by their inability to structure
a more integrated society, they opened the floodgates to people
with a different vision and purpose. Rallying the disenfranchised
became the purpose of simple, but nevertheless powerful, men in
black who had every intention of shaping Pakistan in their own
image. Inchoate at birth, Pakistan failed to produce the leaders



Choosing Sides 297

needed to fill the political vacuum created by the early death of
Mohammad Ali Jinnah. No one was ready for the role vacated by
the Quaid-i-Azam, and the instincts of the politicians, both at the
center and in the provinces, judged the bureaucracy the greater
threat to their influence. Muslim League politicians tried to enlist
the services of the masses in their confrontation with the ruling
administrators, but in failing in this encounter they precipitated
their own decline. The party of Jinnah splintered and in its
fragmentation prompted the proliferation of lesser organizations.
Few of the parties, however, represented national interests.
Moreover, the localization of the parties exposed their weakness.
It also caused them to seek the help of religious leaders who
insisted on narrow agendas. Kashmir became a prominent
political concern, and no politician could escape that burden.
The protracted Kashmir conflict not only drove a permanent
wedge between Pakistan and India; it became a prime source of
religious commitment. Self-determination for the Kashmiris was
given a democratic context, but Kashmir was never going to make
Pakistan more democratic. The insolubility of the Kashmir
dispute, and the sustained conflict with India, became the source
of Islamic renewal and reification. Kashmir also legitimated a
political role for the clerics, who became the spokesmen for the
restoration of the House of Islam in Kashmir, as in Pakistan.

The expanded influence of the ulema in Pakistani politics meant
clashes of political interest would focus more on the construction
of the true Islamic state than on the nurturing of democratic
purpose. The many had surpassed the few in both drive and
enthusiasm. Mainstream political life now meant the representation
of a tradition imbedded in the customs and values of a people who
were Muslims long before they became Pakistanis. Into this
scenario came the Pakistan army. Believing neither the bureaucrats
nor the politicians could administer to the needs of a divided
nation, the senior army officers assumed leadership roles formerly
the prerogative of the civilian cadres.

Rejecting the politicians because of their divisive behavior, the
generals reclaimed the bureaucracy and gave it a new role.
Modernization and development were given special emphasis and
the bureaucracy was urged to make better use of the country’s
human and physical resources. Elevating the general population’s



298 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

standard of living required a variety of reforms. There was an
expectation that larger public needs could be addressed and that
the masses would find a better future in a Pakistan focused on
economic expansion that did more than benefit the few. Increasing
awareness was expected to bring a higher level of enlightenment,
and with that a more rational understanding of secular government.
Although the army reformers never expected to shift the
population from their traditional practices, they believed that
the people would eventually transcend clerical leadership for
something more progressive and personally rewarding.

Ayub Khan introduced Basic Democracies and a Works Program
that promised fundamental changes in the lives of ordinary
people. Political experience and self-reliance were combined to
promise that people of any station could be empowered and their
life experience enhanced. The bureaucratic system was interposed
between the people and the ulema, and the nation was guided
toward constructive purpose and away from ethnic and sectarian
rivalries. The United States willingly supported Ayub’s program in
nation building with assistance that was supposed to make
Pakistan the model of third world achievement. The politicians,
however, shut out by the Ayub reforms and finding military rule a
challenge to their calling, struck back. Their argument was simple.
The army posed a mortal threat to democracy. The restoration of
the democratic experiment, by which they meant a renewed form
of parliamentary government, was compared with Ayub’s vice-
regal presidential system. In seeking an end to army rule, the
politicians enlisted the services of the religious guides. Their
Islamization of politics was intended to force the army back to the
barracks, but after a decade of stewardship Ayub had made a
permanent place for the army in Pakistan’s political life. What the
politicians lost, however, the Islamists won. The representatives of
religious tradition saw greater gains in their association with the
country’s armed forces.

The 1965 war with India over Kashmir, and the civil war in East
Pakistan hardly five years later, demonstrated the ephemeral
nature of political and economic reform, and the ease with which
a country divided into antagonistic groups could impose great
harm upon itself. Both wars were fought less for territorial gain
than for religious expression. The 1965 war symbolically pitted



Choosing Sides 299

Muslims against Hindus, and ended in virtual stalemate. One
Pakistani Muslim soldier was said to be the equal of six or seven
Indians, but that kind of empty bravado proved nothing on the
battlefield. Kashmir remained in Indian hands. Ayub was forced to
accept responsibility for what in fact had been a fiasco, a poorly
planned and executed military campaign. Considerable damage
was done to the Pakistani psyche, especially to the army’s self-
image. Ayub clung to power to the last possible moment. His
successor, General Yahya Khan, sustained military rule but he also
had to acknowledge it was time to return power to civilian hands.

The country’s first national election was held under army
supervision and although judged fair by most standards the results
nevertheless unleashed a whirlwind. The politicians, out of power
for a dozen years, still had not learned the basic rules of
democratic government. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, a gray eminence in
the 1965 war, took it upon himself to reject the 1970 election
results that had given a parliamentary majority to the East
Pakistan Awami League of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. What ensued
was a weak army high command yielding to the diatribe of the
Pakistan People’s Party leader. Yahya and his generals allowed
themselves to be manipulated by an ambitious politician. The
country paid an enormous price for their timidity. The civil war
that erupted in March 1971 again had religious overtones. East
Pakistan’s Hindu population became a principal target of the
Pakistan army, but the strife impacted on the entire province,
Muslims and Hindus alike. Hindu India became the Bengalis’
major benefactor. Although Pakistan lost its distant province when
New Delhi intervened, what remained of the country after the war
was an even more elevated cry of “Islam in Danger.”

Now it was the army’s turn to enlist the services of the Islamic
fundamentalists. Unable to best the Indian army in a conventional
encounter, the embarrassed and humbled army high command
looked to the militant arm of the Islamist orders to carry the fight
to the enemy. Thus while Bhutto, who had now assumed the reins
of a civilian government, set about transforming Pakistan into a
one-party state with himself the supreme leader, the army was
repairing the damage done to its forces. No less significant, the
Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate prepared for a long,
clandestine campaign in Kashmir, while Bhutto’s diplomacy was



300 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

aimed at a cessation of hostilities in the disputed territory. On
the other side, Bhutto’s adventures in Balochistan had forced the
Pakistan military establishment to engage in still another
unpopular civil war. Pulled in directions it chose not to go, and
citing Bhutto’s abuse of power, the army took the opportunity to
strike against the PPP leader when the 1977 elections were
declared fraudulent by the political opposition and the country
again was caught in an agony of street violence. Bhutto was
deposed and General Zia ul-Haq became Pakistan’s dominant
authority.

Zia confirmed how closely the military had affiliated with the
Islamists. The General’s Islamization program was only in its
infancy when the Red Army was ordered into Afghanistan. The
Kremlin’s decision to invade the neighboring country, already
swept by a Communist revolution, confirmed the thinking of the
Pakistan military that they faced a fight not only to defend the
integrity of Pakistan, but to preserve Islam and the Muslim people.
Already in intimate association with the Islamists, the Pakistan ISI
was given a broader mission that in time defined the limits of the
struggle in and outside Pakistan. Islam not democracy was central
to the mission of those defending the region against an aggressive
atheist force. The subcontinent’s independent Muslim state was
deemed to be in mortal danger from its Indian and largely Hindu
nemesis, and Pakistan’s first line of defense was the country’s
commitment to its Islamic faith. It was that force that the
Pakistani ISI harnessed to meet the perceived threat, and, because
the concerns were not limited to Pakistan, aroused Muslims in
distant places answered the call to jihad, to make holy war on the
defilers of Islamic tradition. They did not make democracy their
mission. Only the American presence hinted that the struggle had
anything to do with democratic objectives. United States military
transfers to Pakistan were enormous and provided Zia and the ISI
with the wherewithal to gather the Afghans for a decisive struggle.
A curious mixture of essentially irregular forces, i.e. Afghans of
diverse tribal identity, Pakistanis, Afghan Arabs, and Muslim
volunteers from other regions of the world, resisted the Red Army.
It was never explained how any outcome could result in a
democratic victory. To argue otherwise is to ignore the realities of
the effort to defeat the Soviet behemoth.



Choosing Sides 301

The road to September 11

Survival not democracy was the objective of Pakistan’s military
establishment. In a struggle for survival, a nation, no matter how
conflicted, returns to its wellsprings, and so Pakistan found energy
and solace in its Islamic commitment. It also received substantial
assistance, funds and manpower from around the Muslim world,
especially from the Arab countries. Pakistanis, and indeed
Muslims around the world, therefore could celebrate when the
Soviets agreed to pull their troops from Afghanistan. The United
States too marked a special victory in its long cold war with
Moscow. Moreover, the Soviet retreat coincided with the passing
of General Zia and his administration. Pakistan returned to
civilian government, and almost overnight the discussion centered
again on the democratic process. There were high hopes in elite
Pakistani circles, echoed in the United States and across Europe.
But the alliance forged between the Pakistan army and the
Islamists was not abandoned, and proved to be just as necessary
in the aftermath of the Soviet withdrawal as it had been during the
long occupation. Eliminating the Communist government in
Kabul and bringing Afghanistan under its control became a high
priority for the ISI and its supporters in the armed services.

The unexpected implosion in Moscow that suddenly brought an
end to the great experiment in Marxism-Leninism seemed to
herald a new age of worldwide democracy, but in Afghanistan it
only caused the Afghan Communist system to come apart. The
many elements that had subscribed to resisting the Red Army now
sought other avenues for their expression. Thus began the long
and costly internecine conflict that reaped more havoc to the
damage wreaked by the Soviet troops. In the midst of this tribal
warfare was the ISI, ever trying to turn the battle in favor of
Pakistan’s long-term interests. The ISI were operating in similar
fashion in Kashmir. In 1989, the year when the last Soviet soldier
departed Afghanistan, an uprising erupted in the disputed
territory. The ISI could not dodge their complicity in the guerrilla
assaults on Indian installations in Kashmir. Muslim warriors were
welcome to join the struggle and the forces of the jihadis became a
common element in the protracted effort to make Pakistan secure
and Islam an unbeatable force.



302 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Pakistan not Afghanistan was the key for the most ambitious
members of the jihadi movement. What was at stake was more a
matter of Islamic renewal and purpose than a call to stable and
responsible government. A vast network had emerged from the
shadows of the Islamic world which linked the foes of Western
secularism with the military institutions of Pakistan. Zia’s
Islamization program had caused the madrassahs to multiply
and the output from these schools of religious instruction became
the willing recruits for a steady stream of jihadis. One major
consequence of this development was the formation of the
Taliban, which by 1996, with significant Pakistani assistance,
had seized Kabul from the warring militias and had spread its fiat
to most major regions of Afghanistan. The Islamists and their
jihadi shock troops were also active in Kashmir, but it was New
Delhi that first noted their impact on Pakistan, citing the
Talibanization of Pakistan in a period when civilian government
appeared to dominate decision-making processes. There was no
escaping the ubiquitous actions of the ISI and the Pakistan army.
The short-lived governments of Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif
could not be described in terms of democratic renewal. Their
coming and going, and coming and going again, had more to do
with the nexus of military and Islamist activities than with the
birth pangs of Pakistani democracy. The politics of Benazir and
Nawaz was little more than a sideshow. The main events were
Islamabad’s dominance in Afghanistan through links with the
Taliban, and the intensification of the intifada in Kashmir.

Al-Qaeda found fertile ground in Pakistan. Although it was the
Taliban in Kandahar and Kabul that provided the minions of
Osama bin Laden with safe haven and bases in which to train,
plan and launch their attacks on an unsuspecting Western world, it
was Pakistan that, knowingly or not, facilitated their operations.
Operating across a broad geographic landscape, al-Qaeda was
identified with attacks on Americans in Somalia, in Saudi Arabia,
in Tanzania, in Kenya, in Yemen, and finally in the United States.
The ingathering of Muslims to Afghanistan and Pakistan,
dedicated to the struggle with the infidel, had been initiated by
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and it did not cease with the
Soviet retreat. But whereas Afghanistan offered these dedicated
fighters the remote terrain to establish their many fortresses, it was



Choosing Sides 303

Pakistan that provided them with access to the larger world. The
events of September 11, 2001 brought these otherwise obscure
connections into prominence. Al-Qaeda suicide bombers hijacked
four American passenger airliners, two of which they flew into
the World Trade Center in New York City. Another struck the
Pentagon in Washington. A fourth crashed to earth in a field in
Pennsylvania before it could deliver another lethal blow against an
American target. Approximately three thousand people lost their
lives in this unprecedented assault on American soil. George W.
Bush, the American President since January, announced that war
had been declared upon the United States, but where responsibility
for the action could be laid was another matter. All trails led to
Osama bin Laden and ultimately to remote Afghanistan, where
the suicidal terrorists had trained among the Taliban before
passing through Pakistan to their destinations in Europe and the
United States.

The war on terrorism

Pervez Musharraf had served as Pakistan’s Chief Executive since
October 1999 and only shortly before the events of September 11
had assumed the office of President. Reluctant to return authority
to civilian hands, Musharraf had talked effusively about the time
needed to reclaim Pakistan’s purpose and especially to construct
democratic institutions. Musharraf believed it possible to bring
stability and progress to Pakistan. But he also was committed to a
foreign policy that gave virtual carte blanche to religious militants
and their ISI mentors operating in both Afghanistan and Kashmir.
Foreign policy trumped domestic objectives. Building Pakistani
democracy never received the high priority given to achieving
geopolitical goals. Musharraf therefore sustained diplomatic
relations with the Taliban and gave the ISI a free hand to form
alliances with Islamist groups in Afghanistan and elsewhere in the
Islamic world. Pakistan’s intimacy with the Taliban also meant
there would be connections to al-Qaeda, and the latter exploited
the relationship to maximize its global opportunities. Linkages
between the ISI, al-Qaeda, and the Pakistani Jayash-i-Mohammad
as well as Lashkar-i-Tayyaba were well established. Each was able
to use the other’s base camps, though the Pakistani militants were



304 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

more inclined to operate in Kashmir than in Afghanistan.
Nonetheless, Maulana Masood Azhar, leader of the Jayash-i-
Mohammad, and the jihadis under his command were known to
have operated in Khost and Kandahar and to have had close
associations with the Taliban Emir, Mullah Omar. Both leaders
had also been major recipients of Osama bin Laden’s celebrated
money transfers.

At the time of the al-Qaeda strikes against the Twin Towers and
the Pentagon, the militants were no mystery to ISI chief General
Mehmood Ahmed. The continuing disorder in Pakistan’s cities and
towns, the use of terror and intimidation, like the earlier bombing
of the Egyptian embassy in Islamabad, had provided sufficient
cause to charge the complicity of Taliban and al-Qaeda agents in
the violence in Pakistan as early as 1995. The intensification of
violence in the country was also cause for the informed and more
secular segments of Pakistani society to demand the reining in of
the ISI and the more violence-prone organizations. Neither
Benazir nor Nawaz had succeeded in bringing the terrorists to
book and there was some anticipation that the military government
of Pervez Musharraf would act more aggressively to neutralize the
perpetrators of the mayhem. It was not until August 2001,
however, that Musharraf, faced with deepening sectarian conflict,
banned the Lashkar-i-Jhangvi and the Sipah-i-Mohammad.
Musharraf had done nothing, however, to halt the operations of
the ISI and its thousands of regulars and irregulars. Torn between
a desire to establish normalcy in the country and a foreign policy
concerned with maximizing gains in a limited international arena,
Musharraf generally seemed sincere in the former while practicing
duplicity in the latter. September 11 brought that contradiction
into full view.

Addressing the country on September 19, Musharraf spoke of
the great dangers confronting Pakistan. He mentioned the war
against terrorism that had been imposed on the United States
following the tragic events of September 11. The entire Muslim
world, he said, as well as the United Nations stood behind the
Americans in their effort to root out and destroy the purveyors of
unprovoked mass violence. Moreover, because the terrorists were
judged to be al-Qaeda operators, and because al-Qaeda was
entrenched in Afghanistan, the United States had asked the



Choosing Sides 305

Pakistan government to provide Washington with intelligence,
logistic support, and the right to use Pakistani airspace for strikes
on al-Qaeda targets. Although American operational plans were
not yet known, the President said he had decided the situation was
so critical that he had given an affirmative reply to Washington’s
request. To act otherwise, Musharraf declared, could spell disaster
for Pakistan. Aware of Islamist opposition to his decision, he
insisted only a small minority of those consulted in his National
Security Council, cabinet, and among other politicians, religious
leaders, retired senior officers, academic scholars, and former
foreign ministers had called for denying the American request.
Asserting he had tried to bring the Taliban into the mainstream of
world diplomacy, he insisted he had not abandoned that quest. It
was his wish that the Taliban could still be persuaded to moderate
its policies. And although Mullah Omar had declared bin Laden a
guest of the Afghan people and was adamant he would shelter him
from the Americans, Musharraf said there might be other ways of
dealing with Washington’s demand that bin Laden be arrested and
extradited to the United States. Echoing the Taliban, Musharraf
asked for evidence that would incontrovertibly prove the al-Qaeda
leader was responsible for the attacks of September 11.
Musharraf’s speech indicated he still wanted it both ways: he
had opened the door to the United States, and he still clung to the
view that Islamists and terrorists were not the same.

Musharraf’s statements aimed to buy time. Sensing the
Americans were mobilizing for an attack on al-Qaeda bases in
Afghanistan, and possibly too for an assault on the Taliban regime
of Mullah Omar, the Pakistani President endeavored to protect his
country’s and his army’s interests in the fast-changing events. To
defy the United States in the aftermath of the horrific events of
September 11 would be to place Pakistan in direct association
with the actions of al-Qaeda. Moreover, at this juncture there was
no separating al-Qaeda from the Taliban, and Islamabad was
forced to choose between being identified as a co-conspirator with
the named band of terrorists, or joining the American call for the
severing of ties to the regime of Mullah Omar. Musharraf was also
forced to ponder the decision to neutralize the most militant of the
Islamist organizations operating in Pakistan. Not without
considerable hesitation and foreboding Musharraf declared he



306 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

had chosen to stand with the Americans. Citing New Delhi’s
sustained effort to have Pakistan declared a terrorist state and
President Bush’s declaration that not only terrorists but those who
harbor them were justifiable targets, Musharraf noted that India
had offered the United States defense facilities for its war on
terrorism. India’s tactics, he said, were to place Pakistan in a
situation where strikes could be launched at Pakistan’s nuclear
facilities and international support could be mustered for New
Delhi’s expanded war in Kashmir. Musharraf also spoke of the
recent Dushanbe conference in Tajikistan, where New Delhi
teamed up with Central Asian governments to increase support to
the Northern Alliance, the only remaining force in Afghanistan
still capable of fighting the Taliban. The Indian government,
Musharraf declared, was intent on achieving a regime change in
Kabul that would establish an anti-Pakistan government in
Afghanistan. For these reasons, Musharraf concluded, he had
accepted the American request for assistance. At the same time, he
reiterated his argument that in joining with the United States in the
war on global terrorism he made no connection with Pakistan’s
desire to see a just resolution of the Kashmir issue. Nor did he
believe the Kashmiri struggle for self-determination was in any
way related to the acts of terror perpetrated by al-Qaeda.

Musharraf’s decision to assist the United States was condemned
in conservative Muslim circles, both in Pakistan and beyond. In
Afghanistan, Muslim clerics and scholars were virtually all
reported to be in support of Osama bin Laden and they called
upon the Taliban regime to offer him protection. Afghanistan’s
more extreme elements publicized the need for a jihad against the
United States. Similar sentiments were heard from their brethren
in Pakistan. For the Islamists, the American targeting of bin Laden
was merely a pretext for a general assault on the Islamic world and
they urged the Pakistan government to reconsider its support for
the Americans. Nonetheless, with the United Nations Security
Council calling for the immediate arrest of Osama bin Laden, and
with the Iranian Foreign Minister joining other world leaders in
demanding the arrest and punishment of those behind the
September 11 attack, the Pakistan government had no other
option. Pakistan provided the Americans with use of several
military airstrips near the Afghan frontier. No longer in a position



Choosing Sides 307

to equivocate, Musharraf had committed Pakistan to the war on
terrorism.

On September 26, however, the Pakistan Foreign Minister
Abdus Sattar condemned the support made available to the
Afghan Northern Alliance. The Alliance’s charismatic leader,
Ahmed Shah Masud, had been assassinated by alleged al-Qaeda
agents, pretending to be journalists, on September 9, less than
forty-eight hours before the attack on the United States.
Anticipating support would be made available to the Northern
Alliance following the September 11 attack, the agents had killed
Masud with the aim of demoralizing and causing the break-up
of the Alliance. Now, however, the United States, assisted by the
Central Asian republics as well as Russia and Iran, was
determined not only to sustain the Alliance but to expand its
operations against the Taliban. Pakistan’s attempt to forestall such
efforts were clearly directed at bolstering the Taliban regime in
the face of an attempt by the United States to destroy not only
al-Qaeda but the Taliban too. Musharraf was trapped on the
proverbial horns of a great dilemma. The dynamics of the
situation in Afghanistan had shifted from the Taliban and Pakistan
to the Americans and the Northern Alliance. Masud was dead, but
the United States had filled the leadership vacuum and the struggle
for Afghanistan had taken yet another turn. Belgium’s European
Union leader and Foreign Minister, Loui Michel, summed up the
situation best. Though understanding Islamabad’s concern about a
regime change in Kabul, Michel noted, “there are no good
terrorists and bad terrorists.” The Taliban, like al-Qaeda, he
chided the Pakistanis, was a threat to the stability of Pakistan and
to moderate governments all over the Muslim world. Also
pressuring the Pakistan government, the United Nations called
for a broad-based interim coalition government in Afghanistan.
The Taliban, it was said, might have control of ninety percent of
Afghan territory but it did not have the support of ninety percent
of the Afghan population. The U.N. Assistant Secretary General,
Fransesc Vendrell, insisted the majority of Afghans were hostages
in their own country. The Six-Plus-Two organization, the Afghan
Support Group, the U.N. Security Council, and the U.N. Secretary
General all wanted a political solution, he said, but nothing could
be done to relieve the crisis until bin Laden and al-Qaeda had been



308 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

liquidated. Moreover, the time for negotiations on this matter had
passed.

The American military response to the September 11 attack
began with an aerial campaign against al-Qaeda and Taliban
installations in Afghanistan. The intense bombing, using a variety
of weapons, including unmanned as well as manned aircraft, was
a prelude to the use of American special forces. First authorized to
raid and return to ships in the Indian Ocean or bases in friendly
countries, especially in Uzbekistan, they were later called to
establish bases inside Afghan territory. Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates were pressured to break diplomatic ties
with the Taliban, and Islamabad was put on notice that it too
would have to withdraw support for a regime it had sponsored
since the early 1990s. With a considerable segment of the
intelligentsia supporting the decision to sever relations with the
Taliban Afghan government, the Jamaat-i-Islami and the different
factions of the Jamiat-ul-Ulema-i-Islam condemned the American
air strikes and the incursion into the neighboring state. Taking to
the streets, the Islamist parties tried to rally massive demonstrations
against the Americans, and especially against Musharraf for
having yielded to a non-Muslim power. Their call had a particular
impact on the Pashtuns. A Shariat Movement was organized under
the leadership of Sufi Mohammad of Malakand, who attempted to
raise an army to assist the Taliban in their struggle with the United
States. Thousands of Pakistanis were recruited in these emotional
circumstances but when Islamabad decided it was time to break
with the Taliban this large group of Pakistanis found themselves
on the wrong side of the fight. With limited means to withstand
the American intrusion, cut off from re-supply, and faced with a
quickly disintegrating Taliban organization, the Pakistani force
found themselves at the mercy of the Northern Alliance and the
Afghan forces that joined with it in the advance on Kabul and
Kandahar.

Musharraf was forced to react to the fast-moving events on the
ground. Accepting the inevitable defeat of the Taliban government,
especially after the fall of Kabul, the General-President tried to
salvage what he could from the Afghanistan situation by calling
for a U.N. peacekeeping force to demilitarize Kabul. That effort
was futile in the circumstances. Northern Alliance forces took



Choosing Sides 309

control of the capital and the fear that Pashtun representation
would be minimized in the ad hoc government quickly became
reality. Taliban control of Afghanistan was replaced by a
decentralized command structure, unified only by the international
contingent led by United States special forces. But though the
Americans were concerned with pressing the fight against al-Qaeda
and the hardline Taliban, they were also mindful of the need to
establish a semblance of governmental order in the beleaguered
country. Calls went out to King Zahir Shah, in exile in Italy, and to
his entourage, which included the Pashtuns Hamid Karzai and
Yunas Khalis. The need to reassure the Pashtuns that Afghanistan
would not be overrun by an Uzbek and Tajik dominated
government was high on Washington’s list of priorities. Therefore
in addition to the seven thousand men the United States had
inserted into the country, the U.N. Security Council authorized the
sending of five thousand peacekeepers to restore law and order to
Kabul and to stop rival tribal leaders from again preventing the
consolidation of the nation. No amount of external support,
however, could guarantee a better future for Afghanistan or an
end to the terrorism associated with the jihadi movements.

Musharraf could not now retreat from his earlier decision to
join with the Americans, nor could he continue to support an ISI
committed to pro-Taliban operations. Leaving the pursuit of bin
Laden and Mullah Omar to the Americans and their team of
international forces, Musharraf turned his attention to conditions
in Pakistan. The President called for and received ISI chief
Mehmood Ahmed’s resignation and appointed Lieutenant-General
Ehsan ul-Huq of military intelligence to replace him. The new ISI
head was ordered to examine ISI ranks and to purge all agents
associated with the more militant Islamist associations. Moreover,
the ISI was to be de-Talibanized and brought firmly under the
army command structure. Word was circulated that Muslim
extremists would do best to leave the government, but Musharraf’s
order to ferret out militants was never clearly defined in the case of
Kashmir, where the Afghan mujahiddin model remained in play.
Nor was it clear how the Islamist organizations that fueled the
intifada in Kashmir were to be prevented from sustaining havoc
throughout Pakistan, where minorities and foreigners were at
considerable risk. And most worrisome to the Musharraf regime



310 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

was the tie connecting Pakistani militants with al-Qaeda and
Taliban cells secreted in Pakistan. Moreover, just as the ISI had
enabled bin Laden and Mullah Omar to flee the grasp of their
would-be captors, so the ISI, even under new leadership, was
reluctant to curtail the operations of some of the most radical
Islamist organizations.

Musharraf ordered the round-up of fundamentalists of varying
significance, only to release them when it was said there was
insufficient evidence to implicate them in plots to harm the
country. Harming India, however, was another matter. In October,
Jayash-i-Mohammad and Lashkar-i-Tayyaba were implicated in a
suicide bombing of the Kashmir State Assembly which killed
almost three dozen innocents. Indications pointed to connections
between the actions in Afghanistan and those in Kashmir,
especially those high-profile terrorist acts that aimed to demonstrate
that though the militants could be assaulted they could not be
silenced. If for a period the more violent fundamentalists were
destabilized in Afghanistan, they had demonstrated they could still
function with impunity in Kashmir. Musharraf therefore found
himself not only pressured to make greater efforts to monitor
Pakistan’s porous border with Afghanistan, but also urged to close
jihadi training camps and installations in Azad Kashmir as well as
in Pakistan. New Delhi was particularly agitated, especially after
Musharraf had visited the Indian capital in July in an effort to
relieve the tensions caused by the Kargil incident and the constant
sniping in Kashmir. Using the leverage afforded by the September
11 attack on the United States, New Delhi pointed to Pakistan
government complicity in the construction of a vast terrorist
network. Musharraf was thus forced to show his government, and
most notably the Pakistan army, that he was no longer committed
to supporting militant Islamists.

In view of the need to transform the Pakistan army and to make
it more compatible with American interests in the war on
terrorism, Musharraf had to do more than change the chief of
the ISI. In October, the President extended his term as Chief of the
Army Staff and reshuffled all the key positions in the Pakistan
army. Musharraf acknowledged the price on his head, that he was
a prime target for an assassin, and the army makeover was aimed
at constructing the most effective and loyal team of generals, from



Choosing Sides 311

headquarters to corps commanders to the field units. However,
Musharraf also had to withstand the verbal abuse of his
detractors. Former ISI chief and now retired Lieutenant-General
Hameed Gul, speaking at the Lahore High Court Bar Association,
declared the events of September 11 were part of an Israeli and
Zionist conspiracy to create the pretext for the long-term
occupation of strategic Muslim territory. Reciting the litany of
Osama bin Laden, Gul insisted that Israel’s American ally wanted
to subjugate the Muslim world. Jihad was the only answer to this
action against the Islamic people. In the twisted logic of the
jihadis, Gul linked official American chicanery to the destruction
of the Twin Towers and the attack on the Pentagon. The
Americans, he implied, needed a cause célèbre to justify their
actions in Afghanistan. Hence the events of September 11. Gul’s
description of September 11 had been circulated earlier via the
web and it was hardly an original presentation. Nevertheless, it
revealed obstacles Musharraf faced in reorganizing his army and
strengthening his political bona fides. Gul’s argument found an
echo in the divisions within the pro-Musharraf faction of the
Pakistan Muslim League when it failed to support the decision to
provide air bases and Pakistani airspace to United States forces.
Musharraf’s Muslim League Party was divided on the subject of a
broad-based government in Afghanistan, believing it would
damage Pakistani interests. Moreover, Musharraf was put on
notice that further capitulation to the Americans would destroy
Muslim League chances in the anticipated general elections.

Musharraf had to wear two hats, neither of which fitted him
perfectly. Reorganizing the army was a great challenge, but so too
was the President’s desire to transform the Pakistani political
system. Musharraf’s role as leader of the Pakistan Muslim League
(Q, Quaid-i-Azam) needed special care as the country struggled
to achieve a degree of normalcy while immersed in a major
international conflict. Washington attempted to ease Musharraf’s
burden by not addressing the connection between Kashmir and
Afghanistan. The visit of U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell
to India and Pakistan centered on playing down India’s accusation
that Pakistan was a sponsor of terrorism. Instead, Powell attempted
to bridge the differences between the two nations, each of which
was important to the war effort. Powell cited the centrality of the



312 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Kashmir issue to improved India–Pakistan relations, but in India
he also had his spokesman reiterate the strengthened bilateral ties
between New Delhi and Washington. Although the pressure on
Musharraf remained, and in fundamentalist circles in fact had
increased, the attentive Pakistani public read in American
behavior an indication that everything had changed, including
the American attitude toward the Kashmir dispute. Musharraf
therefore used the occasion to call for the reorientation of the
country’s intelligence services so that there would be diminished
interest in political intelligence and more resources devoted to
criminal, sectarian, and terrorist activity. The restructuring
involved both horizontal and vertical changes that allowed for
greater coordination between the federal and provincial levels and
could provide the authorities with advance information that
would assist in pre-empting terrorist actions. Reversing develop-
ments in train for almost twenty years was a gargantuan task, but
the effort seemed to indicate that Musharraf was serious about
turning Pakistan away from the anarchy that its flirtation with the
extremists had caused. If nothing more had been accomplished, it
appeared that Musharraf himself had undergone a transformation.

On October 24 an Afghan Shura was convened in Peshawar, an
indication of the Afghans’ desire to find stability in the mayhem
that continued to swirl around them. Former King Zahir Shah was
cited as a symbol of unity and it was speculated that he could head
a broad-based interim government and call for the meeting of a
Loya Jirga to pave the way for a more enduring peace. Although
the King’s representatives were not yet prepared to attend the
conference, the two-day session brought together some seven
hundred notables from Afghanistan’s thirty provinces, representing
all ethnic, communal, and political groups. Also in attendance
were members of Pakistan’s Federally Administered Tribal Areas
(FATA). Conspicuously absent from the Shura were Gulbadin
Hekmatyar and the Hizb-i-Islami faction that had denounced the
United States and Musharraf. Hekmatyar had pledged holy war
against those who had attacked the Taliban and al-Qaeda. Once
the favorite of the ISI and hence the CIA as well, the old militant
was now seen as directly connected to bin Laden. American
special forces therefore were ordered to locate his whereabouts in
Iran and Afghanistan, but attempts at eliminating him were



Choosing Sides 313

unsuccessful. Nevertheless, the Shura was the necessary first round
that would lead to more formal meetings in Europe where the
Afghan King was expected to preside. Signaling how far the wheel
of fortune had turned, Saudi Arabia publicly condemned Osama
bin Laden as a heretic and declared his conduct contrary to the
universal principles of Islam. Insisting he had done great harm to
Islam and was no friend of Muslims, the Saudis accused bin Laden
of driving a wedge between the civilizations. The Saudi
ambassador to Pakistan also found fault with the Taliban, which
he said had brought great misery to the Afghan people. Indicating
Riyadh would increase its financial support to the Afghan people
and the refugees in Pakistan, he declared his government
condemned terrorism in all its forms and was prepared to give
assistance to counter-terrorism in any part of the world.

In spite of these developments the Musharraf government
repeated its concern that only a broad-based government in
Afghanistan would be acceptable. Still concerned that Tajiks and
Uzbeks could dominate a new Afghan regime, Musharraf hinted
that the war on terrorism could flounder if due attention were not
given to this Pakistani dilemma. An ad hoc body describing itself
as the “Defense of Pakistan and Afghanistan Council” (DPAC)
brought together a host of religious parties dedicated to the
defense of the Taliban. Warning Musharraf that his intimacy with
the United States was totally at odds with the Islamic people, the
DPAC declared its intention to begin a vast disobedience move-
ment on November 1. The Islamists announced they would close
all major roads in Pakistan and prevent the movement of vehicular
traffic. Government civil servants were called to join the effort by
quitting their posts and paralyzing the government. Among the
more vocal representatives of what was described as a jihadi
conference were the Jamaat-i-Islami, the two factions of the
Jamiat-ul-Ulema-i-Islam, the Jamiat-Ulema-i-Pakistan, the Tanzim-
i-Islami, and the Harkatul Mujahiddin. Collectively the Islamists
declared the Musharraf government had lost the support of the
masses. Musharraf, in their judgment, had committed an act of
heresy by allowing the Americans to make war on a Muslim
country. The Islamists also condemned the United Nations and
urged Pakistan to withdraw its membership from the world
organization. On the action front, the DPAC noted the need to



314 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

organize training camps and to enlist recruits for the war with the
infidels. The latter call was especially associated with the leader of
Tehrik Nifaz-i-Mohammadi, Maulana Sufi Mohammad. Joining
his clerical colleagues, Qazi Hussain Ahmed, chief of the Jamaat-i-
Islami, declared that the Musharraf government had lost the
confidence of the masses and would be toppled within a few
months.

Musharraf, however, had no option but to stay the course. With
the Americans devastating Taliban defenses from the air, the
Northern Alliance made significant progress on the ground. The
Taliban government ceased to be an effective instrument and
concerns turned to the establishment of an Afghan administration
and the identification of an Afghan leader acceptable to the
different factions in the Northern Alliance and among the Pashtun
tribes. To that end, Abdul Haq, a Pashtun leader in the mujahiddin
resistance against the Red Army, went on a personal peace mission,
hoping to win the favor of moderate members of the Taliban who
had formerly been his associates. Haq’s mission, however, came to
an abrupt end when he was seized by his erstwhile colleagues,
tortured, and summarily executed. Musharraf was forced to deny
ISI complicity in the death of Abdul Haq, insisting the intelligence
directorate no longer supported the Taliban and that the Taliban
representative in Pakistan, Mulla Zaeef, had been denied
permission to hold a public press conference. The Taliban,
however, remained dedicated to their cause. While Musharraf
made a hurried trip to Teheran to get Iran’s approval for a broad-
based government for Afghanistan, Taliban fighters were quoted
asserting there was no moderate Taliban, that they rejected all
broad-based governments, including one that allowed for their
representation, a possibility Musharraf had continued to promote.
Cooperation with the Northern Alliance, it was said, was
unthinkable. Nor would the Taliban join with King Zahir Shah.
The King, they argued, had failed to do anything to assist the
Afghans during their long war with the Soviet Union and they
wanted no part in a government built around his return to Kabul.

As efforts were being made to assemble an interim Afghan
government, Taliban fighters were forced to yield the northern
Afghan metropolis of Mazar-i-Sharif. A relief column made up
principally of four thousand Pakistani volunteers, organized by



Choosing Sides 315

the Harakat Jihadi Islami, was prevented from joining up with
their Taliban brethren when they came under heavy American
bombing. The northern areas controlled by the forces of the Uzbek
general Rashid Dostum received the surrender of hundreds of
Taliban warriors. The successful campaign made it possible for
elements of an American mountain division, based in Uzbekistan,
to establish a presence in Afghanistan and eventually to gain
control of the Bagram air base, which was made ready for
American air power. Musharraf was in London while these events
were happening. In a public gathering he described Islam as a
religion of peace and called for a quick end to the hostilities in
Afghanistan. Pakistan’s decision to join the United States and the
international coalition, according to the General, was deliberate
and taken in pursuit of a “just course.” The war on terrorism, he
cautioned, could not be confined to Afghanistan. It must also take
into account the problems of Kashmir, Palestine, and Chechnya.
Knocking a few branches off the tree of terrorism, he opined, does
not deal with the tree itself. Arguing Pakistan was a “moderate”
Islamic country, he attributed the demonstrations and protest
meetings depicted in worldwide television broadcasts to Afghans
and other foreigners who wanted to give Pakistan a negative
reputation. Obfuscation and ambivalence seemed to be the order
of the day. Even the statements of the exiled Benazir and Sharif
had little if any credibility. Moreover, their respective parties had
fragmented in their absence and were in no position to provide
guidance to their followers. The only clear political voice was that
emanating from the Islamist camp that opposed Musharraf’s
military regime and continued to find solace in the Taliban and the
personality of Osama bin Laden. Democracy was nowhere to be
seen and the only matter that appeared to gain consensus was the
institutionalization of the military in politics.

Terrorism and the nation-state

In April 1948, Mohammad Ali Jinnah had discussed his vision of
a secular Pakistan state. Pakistan, he said, “is not going to be a
theocratic state to be ruled by priests with a divine mission.” In
1949, Liaquat Ali Khan repeated and elaborated on this statement.
Rule by priests, he declared, was “absolutely foreign to Islam.



316 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Islam does not recognize either priesthood or sacred authority;
and therefore, the question of a theocracy simply does not arise in
Islam. If there are any who still use the word theocracy in the same
breath as the polity of Pakistan, they are either laboring under
grave misapprehension or indulging in mischievous propaganda.”
On the issue of sectarian differences, Pakistan’s first Prime Minister
noted, “differences of opinion among his [the Prophet’s] followers
are a blessing. It is for us to make our differences a source of
strength to Islam and to Pakistan and not to exploit them for our
own interests which will weaken both Pakistan and Islam.”

For those who speak of Pakistan as a failed state, it is enough to
remind them that it is more an example of failed leadership. After
the passing of the founding fathers there was no one to assume the
responsibilities of modern governance, and this failing more than
anything else produced débâcle after débâcle, finally resulting in the
free-wheeling activity of the most obscurantist and irresponsible
people ever to lay claim to state leadership. The Taliban found
fertile soil in Afghanistan, but its creation may be attributed to
Pakistan. By their abdication of responsibility at home and
obsequious posturing abroad, Pakistan’s leaders never rose beyond
the fantasies of their polyglot population. Leaders in name only,
they foisted on the people conditions that seldom permitted them
to transcend the primordial. Moreover, the arrogance of officialdom
plunged the country of Jinnah and Liaquat into a miasma of
circumstance that blinded the people to the realities of a world
changed by the engines of science and technology. Obsessed with
their larger neighbor, they were always reminded by Kashmir of
the conspiracy that denied them status as the world’s principal
Muslim power. In the absence of a realized national identity, it was
left to the Islamists to articulate a message of questionable logic
that mirrored the confusion of a leaderless people.

The termination of the Taliban government was received in
Afghanistan with the popular excitement that can only come from
a people relieved of a system that had savaged their traditions. The
end of Taliban rule in no way meant an end to Islamic belief or
practice. The Muslims of Afghanistan who gathered in Bonn to
hammer out an agreement on an interim government took only
nine days of civil discourse to achieve their initial objective. By
contrast, what could be said of Pakistan, which since the time of



Choosing Sides 317

Zia ul-Haq had allowed itself to fall victim to the ambitions of
Islamists and their jihadi shock troops? Conditioned by a Pakistan
army humiliated in East Bengal, Islamabad adopted the programs
of the most zealous elements in the population. All the country’s
energy was focused on the acquisition of nuclear weapons, on a
misguided policy in Afghanistan, and on popular rebellion in
Kashmir. Held hostage to these schemes and dominated by
ambitious personalities, Pakistan’s economy was allowed to
deteriorate and its often repeated quest for democracy proved
nothing more than the hollow calls of the disenfranchised. Indeed,
Musharraf’s reasons for joining the United States in its war on
terrorism centered on these defining issues.

The events of September 11 had transformed Pakistan’s foray in
Afghanistan into global conflict, and in the context of superpower
activity even a South Asian nuclear power had to accept the status
of being a lesser entity. Nonetheless, Pakistan continued to see its
security in the context of a “strategic depth” policy in its ongoing
struggle with India. Pakistan’s military establishment therefore
envisaged a continuing role in Afghanistan. It also continued to
pursue the notion that Kashmir could be pried from the stubborn
clutches of New Delhi. But in reality Islamabad had to take a back
seat in the unfolding events that were now truly beyond its
control. The Pakistan of Pervez Musharraf had been given a new
opportunity to examine its ethos and to decide what exactly it
wanted for its future. The situation juxtaposed the messianic state
that conceived of Pakistan as the fortress of the Islamic faith, with
that other Pakistan, guided by the principles of Jinnah and
Liaquat, that aimed at transforming a portion of the Asian
subcontinent into a modern, secular democracy. Somewhere in the
din of the war on terrorism, in the clashes of sentiment in Kashmir,
and the furtive effort to give new meaning to the tribal society of
Afghanistan, there existed a Pakistani yearning to achieve an
enlightenment commensurate with the age of globalization.

External events had given Pakistan yet another opportunity to
give substance to dreams that the Islamists had turned into
nightmares. Democracy remained a goal of the more worldly
segments of Pakistani society and it had become Musharraf’s task
to reverse the alchemy of social discourse and to redirect popular
energy toward constructive projects. It was no simple matter to



318 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

sever ties with the Taliban, which had become Pakistan’s
inspiration, guide, and benefactor. Musharraf, however, had finally
come to recognize this most contemporary of Frankenstein
monsters as a creature he could not control; it had metamorphosed
into a menace that threatened Pakistan’s survival as a nation-state.
No longer a government alternative in the heart of the Muslim
world, the remnants of the Taliban and al-Qaeda scattered into the
mountain retreats of Afghanistan and spilled over the frontier to
regroup among their brethren in Pakistan. The sustained American
military campaign against the Taliban and al-Qaeda in Afghanistan
could not avoid crossing into Pakistani territory. Protective of its
frontier areas, the Pakistan government had envisaged Afghanistan
as its final line of defense against an aggressive Indian army, and
that strategy was viewed as being put in jeopardy by American
forces in pursuit of al-Qaeda. Nor could skirmishes between
Pakistani border troops and Americans be avoided. The Musharraf
government therefore was compelled to criticize the American
incursions and to insist only Pakistani forces would be used against
fleeing Taliban and their terrorist compatriots.

The Taliban endeavored to make Pakistan part of a greater
Afghanistan, a messianic state that eventually would encompass
the whole of Central Asia. The tide of history had turned in
another direction, however, but the belief of bin Laden’s al-Qaeda
and Mullah Omar’s jihadis, that the age of Pax Islamica had
arrived, and that it could be achieved with the Talibanization of
Pakistan persisted. Musharraf finally seemed to grasp the
magnitude of Pakistan’s dilemma. Haltingly, he tried to reach
out to India, calling upon New Delhi to assist in treating their
mutual paranoia. Musharraf wanted serious dialog about their
mutual but antagonistic grievances in a Kashmir that for too long
had divided the two neighbors. But the Islamist militants also
reached out to India, and their methods had nothing to do with
diplomatic entreaties.

The terrorist assault on the Indian parliament on December 13,
2001 was attributed to Kashmiri jihadis, but by this time it was
meaningless to separate one group of homicidal radicals from
another. Al-Qaeda had merged with the Taliban, and the jihadis of
Pakistan and Kashmir had become one and the same. In Pakistan,
Lashkar-i-Tayyaba and Jayash-i-Muhammad were singled out by



Choosing Sides 319

the Musharraf regime, but their distinctive characteristics were
lost in their common use of violence. The Islamists’ flagrant
assault on the seat and symbol of India’s secular democracy
brought an instant reaction from New Delhi. India massed troops
on its western border and accused Islamabad of complicity. India
demanded Islamabad transfer to its charge several named
terrorists and aggressively eliminate terrorist installations and
cells. With the threat of nuclear war growing in the region, world
leaders could not ignore probabilities of a horrific calamity.
Among other leaders, Britain’s Prime Minister made a hurried visit
to India and Pakistan in an effort to ease tensions and stimulate
another round of diplomacy. Acknowledging that the attack on
the Indian parliament was aimed at weakening the Musharraf
government and hence the American-led war on terrorism, New
Delhi was imposed upon to resist laying all the blame on Pakistan.
Musharraf publicly declared his determination to root out the
terrorists. Nevertheless, he also noted he was in no position to
abandon the long-held view that Kashmir must be given the right
of self-determination. The two actions, however, fed upon each
other.

Jinnah had held all forms of extremism in contempt. Mush-
arraf’s declared intention to follow in the footsteps of the country’s
founder required him to realize that sustained conflict with India
over Kashmir connected with sectarian violence in Pakistan.
Armed jihadi invasions of mosques and imambargahs were no
different from assaults on churches and other Christian sites in the
Muslim country by vengeful terrorists connected with al-Qaeda
and Taliban. On December 31 the Pakistan government
announced the arrest of Hafiz Saeed Ahmad, leader of Lashkar-
i-Tayyaba, and Maulana Masood Azhar of Jaish-i-Mohammad for
violating laws banning provocative speeches. On the same day,
two dozen jihadi foot soldiers were arrested, all alleged members
of Jaish-i-Mohammad and Lashkar-i-Tayyaba. New Delhi indi-
cated guarded satisfaction with the arrests, but its troops
continued to exchange heavy mortar fire with Pakistani units at
the southern end of the line of control in Kashmir. A spokesman
for General Musharraf reiterated Pakistan’s intention to defend its
integrity should Indian forces penetrate Pakistani soil.



11
DEFINING THE FUTURE

Although Musharraf wanted to focus on domestic concerns, the
war on terrorism became even more compelling in January 2002.
The collapse of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and the search-
and-destroy mission launched by the Americans against al-Qaeda
camps and hideaways ran parallel with Musharraf’s orders to
cleanse the ISI of its shadowy role in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Pakistan’s Supreme Court became the venue for the airing of ISI
adventures that included the creation of training camps for
terrorists from a variety of radical Islamist groups. Moreover, the
financial connections between ISI and Pakistan’s religious parties,
as well as the recruitment of jihadis for both Afghanistan and
Kashmir, had been undertaken in spite of an official ban on such
activities. The emergence of the jihadi culture in Pakistan had
become a major subject of public debate, and the questions about
terrorists and freedom fighters had caused obvious divisions
within the population. That debate, however, was largely moot
given aggressive American military action in Afghanistan, much of
it arranged from bases located on Pakistan territory. News that
Mullah Omar, the erstwhile Emir of Afghanistan, had fled
Helmand province pointed to complicity between jihadis loyal to
the Taliban leader and Pashtuns working with the ISI. Washington
was outraged that Omar had been allowed to slip away and
immediately called for the arrest of the Taliban ambassador to

320



Defining the Future 321

Pakistan, Mullah Abdul Salam Zaeef, and his transfer to
American military custody. Musharraf, however, had gone to
Kathmandu for the South Asian Summit and was more interested
in defusing tensions with India. In the meantime, in Afghanistan,
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was taking
shape with the arrival of approximately five hundred British
paratroopers and Royal Marines and, in Kashmir, New Delhi
reported killing more than twelve mujahiddin who were attempt-
ing to break through Indian fortifications. As a consequence of the
continued fighting in Kashmir, India not only refused to withdraw
its military build-up on Pakistan’s borders, but reinforced its lines
at a number of strategic locations.

On January 13, 2002, President Pervez Musharraf addressed the
Pakistani people declaring his government’s highest priority was
the eradication of extremism, violence, and terrorism, and the
re-inspiration of genuine Islamic practices. He declared his respect
for the country’s ulema, but said that he expected them to curb
those elements exploiting religion for their own vested interests.
Musharraf recounted how he had ordered the closing of the
border with Afghanistan in January 2001 to prevent students from
the madrassahs from joining the Taliban. He reminded his
listeners of the February 2001 Anti-Weaponization Ordinance
that was aimed at removing weapons from Pakistani society, and
his speech at the June 2001 Seerat Conference in which he
implored the ulema to avoid inciting religious extremism. He
spoke of his August decision to ban the Lashkar-i-Jhangvi and the
Sipah-i-Mohammad, as well as the warnings issued to the Tehrik-
i-Jafria not to engage in inflammatory sectarian rhetoric.
Musharraf insisted the actions taken by his government were in
the national interest and not a consequence of foreign pressure. He
said he had decided to join the international coalition against
terrorism because it was in Pakistan’s interest, and that it pained
him when religious parties and extremist groups opposed his
action. Referring to the protest meetings and processions that had
resulted in numerous deaths, Musharraf declared he would
continue to meet with religious scholars but that his government
would not tolerate disobedience and threats to undermine the
state. Equating the Pakistani zealots with the Taliban, Musharraf
declared that they claimed their version of Islam to be the only



322 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

one, whereas, he reminded his audience, Muslims practice their
faith in many ways and all are acceptable in God’s eyes. He
beseeched his audience to beware of those who mix politics with
religion and who claim their interpretation of the divine is the only
true path.

Musharraf raised the question of who was responsible “for
misleading thousands of Pakistanis” and sending them to their
death in Afghanistan. Calling for a renewal of patriotism, the
General declared, “Pakistan is our identity, our motherland. We
will be aliens outside Pakistan and be treated as aliens. Pakistan is
our land. It is our soil. If we forsake it, we will face difficulties. This
lesson we must learn.” This meant putting an end to the sectarian
violence that had continued despite the banning of extremist
organizations. Musharraf said it was his objective to rid the nation
of its Kalashnikov culture and to move the country away from the
notion of a theocratic state. Education, he insisted, involves more
than religious learning and he had every intention of revitalizing
Pakistan’s secular educational institutions. Calling upon Pakistanis
to recall the teachings of Mohammad Ali Jinnah, and especially
his call for brotherhood among Muslims of all persuasions as well
as those who find God in other expressions of worship, Musharraf
declared that the mosque is no place for the preaching of hatred.
The country’s religious schools required reform and introspection,
and the President announced a new madrassah ordinance that
would make these schools responsible to the same codes of
behavior required of secular schools. All madrassahs should
be registered by March 23, 2002 and no new madrassah would be
allowed to open without government approval. Religious schools
indulging in extremism, subversion, or militant activity or
possessing weapons would be immediately closed. New teachers
would be trained for the madrassahs who were capable of
teaching the standard subjects of math, science, and languages.
Moreover, foreign students would not be admitted unless they were
properly documented; those who had not received certification
from the government were to be deported. All foreigners visiting
the country were to be scrutinized and only those deemed to have
appropriate business in Pakistan would be allowed to remain.
Musharraf closed his speech by acknowledging that issuing
ordinances and regulations was easy and that the difficulty would



Defining the Future 323

come in their implementation. To this end, the President revealed
that Anti-Terrorist Courts would be strengthened and that
Pakistan would mete out justice to its own miscreants; there
would be no transferring of suspects to India, irrespective of New
Delhi’s demands. Musharraf called for the “land of the pure” to
purify itself. He noted that Pakistan’s population was ninety-eight
percent Muslim and that in a Muslim state he expected the people
to live as brothers and to stand as a model for the larger Islamic
world.

Musharraf’s speech was aimed at separating the government,
and hence the Pakistan army, from its long and tragic involvement
with militant Islam. In a demonstration of willingness to remove
the yoke of terrorism from the country, the President ordered
the banning of five organizations (Jayash-i-Mohammad, Lashkar-i-
Tayyaba, Tehrik-i-Jafria, Sipah-i-Sahaba, and Tanzim Nifaz-i-
Shariat-i-Mohammadi). Under partial ban earlier, the extremist
organizations were now to be prevented from taking any public
positions, holding meetings, collecting funds, or any other activity
associated with a working group. Moreover, no new organization
could assume the name of the banned parties. Mosques also were
to be placed under surveillance, and loudspeaker use, a common
practice, was to be used only on the Friday sabbath and for
specifically religious purposes. Citing the use of Pakistan by
Muslims from other countries, Musharraf let it be known that
Pakistan would no longer serve as a “hub” for their nefarious
actions. “No way, we will not tolerate this any more,” he declared.
Musharraf had set in train a policy that he hoped would nullify the
former Taliban support policy that had given the Lashkars and the
Jayash a free run of the country. September 11 proved the folly of
that policy, and its bankruptcy in both Kashmir and Afghanistan.
As one Pakistani pundit put it, “We are now paying not for our
sins but our foolishness, a history of errors accumulated over the
last decade. When will ISI learn its lessons?” India’s response to
Musharraf’s address was guardedly positive; nevertheless New
Delhi indicated it would wait on “concrete action” before
believing Islamabad had truly changed course.

As might be expected, Musharraf’s new posture on extremist
fundamentalism did not satisfy everybody. In fact those who
condemned the President were more numerous than those daring



324 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

to publicly support the restrictions imposed on the religious
institutions and their chief representatives. Among the critics, few
were prepared to accept Musharraf at his word when he said his
actions were taken in the name of Pakistan’s national interest, not
under foreign pressure. The Secretary General of Sharif’s Pakistan
Muslim League was one of the first on record deploring
Musharraf for what was viewed as his knuckling under to New
Delhi and Washington. The critics’ main line was that in the
name of combating terrorism Musharraf had sold out the
freedom of Kashmir to the “terrorist state of India.” Moreover,
the increased latitude to arrest innocent people could only
transform Pakistan into a police state. The religious leaders and
their parties pursued the same theme, threatening to challenge in
court the government order banning their organizations. Pressure
emanated from provincial government leaders asking Musharraf
to reconsider his decision. The Jamaat-i-Islami wanted its
followers to know that no Muslim ruler since Turkey’s Mustafa
Kemal Ataturk had dared take such action against religious
institutions and that Musharraf was not in a position to
transform the country into a secular state. Musharraf, however,
ignored the protests and the government announced the closing
of 254 offices and the arrest of more than one thousand activists,
all allegedly members of the banned organizations. In the
meantime New Delhi maintained pressure on the Musharraf
regime by declaring there would be no reduction of forces on the
Pakistan frontier until cross-border terrorism totally stopped.
Indian newspapers, however, were more excited by the prospects
of tranquility, calling Musharraf’s speech and subsequent actions
“a watershed” in India-Pakistan relations. The Times of India
referred to Musharraf’s presentation as a “milestone” and called
upon the Vajpayee government to reduce the troop build-up on
the border and give Pakistan a chance to find its way back to
being a “modern, vibrant and confident” nation. Also sounding a
positive note from exile in Dubai, Benazir Bhutto described the
U.S.-led war in Afghanistan as the catalyst of the resurrection of
democracy in Pakistan. A new era was forcing itself on Islamabad
whether Pakistan’s military rulers were prepared for it or not, she
said.



Defining the Future 325

The Musharraf reforms?

However, soon after Musharraf’s strong statement on the subject
of Islamic extremism and his insistence that there be a clear
separation between the mosque and the state, the General began
to backtrack. Blasphemy laws passed earlier subjected people to
cruel penalties, including capital punishment. Musharraf, despite
pleas from the country’s literati and conventional legal fraternity,
refused to declare the blasphemy laws inhumane or violations of
human rights. Nor did he seek to pardon those sentenced to death
for simply discussing issues deemed sensitive to the most
fundamentalist orders. No less significant was an interview the
President gave to a journalist for the American weekly magazine
Newsweek. In noting that his guide, mentor, and role model was
Mohammad Ali Jinnah, Musharraf cited the Quaid’s desire to see
Pakistan develop as a secular not an Islamic state. The comment
was quoted in the religious press and Musharraf was vilified and
accused of putting words in Jinnah’s mouth. Jinnah’s vision for
Pakistan, it was said, did not speak of secularism as a Pakistani
goal. Instead of holding to his position, Musharraf was advised to
deny having made the statement and imply that the reporter had
taken liberties with his interview rather than give a true depiction
of the exchange. Musharraf’s spokesman insisted the General
never used the word “secular.” Pakistan’s vernacular press used
the English word “secular” to imply irreligious behavior. In Urdu
and some of the other more regional languages “secular” was
construed in the pejorative. Given Musharraf’s position, some-
where between the secular and the spiritual, and forced to
acknowledge the growing influence of the Islamists, it was
considered wise to tilt toward the religious interpretation.
Although the controversy was weathered, it nevertheless showed
up the difficulty of moving Pakistan away from its tryst with the
Islamic state and hinted that Musharraf’s beating the drum of
democracy was likely to resonate in ways he did not intend.

In 1999 Musharraf had tried to link his name with that of
Ataturk, but he also expressed the belief that Pakistan was more
Muslim in its practices than the successor state of the Ottoman
Empire. Finding Ataturk too liberal a thinker and too active a
secular reformer for Pakistani tastes, Musharraf subsequently



326 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

adopted the memory of Jinnah, but here too he ran into difficulty.
Jinnah’s bold statement that Pakistanis could represent any
religion, caste, or creed, and that neither ethnic nor religious
differences had anything to do with the state may have sounded
plausible to Pakistanis of his era. But Musharraf was a Pakistani
man of the twenty-first century and an exclusive not inclusive view
of society was the popular focus of attention. Carried to a
powerful conclusion, Pakistan was a state created for Muslims
and therefore it was deemed to be a state guided by Islamic
practices and, in particular, by those whose religious practices
were the least flexible. As a member of the refugee community
from India, Musharraf had to tread lightly; his ambivalence on the
matter of where his thoughts were rooted indicated his difficulty in
being true to his philosophy, though not to his religion. In late
January an American reporter forced Musharraf to come to grips
with his official role as President of Pakistan as well as his personal
sentiments. Daniel Pearl, a journalist for the Wall Street Journal,
was kidnapped while pursuing a lead related to the war on
terrorism. The kidnappers audaciously publicized his incarceration
by sending out email messages and photographs of Pearl’s
desperate circumstances. All efforts to trace the whereabouts of
his kidnappers failed, although the authorities were fairly certain
from the outset which group they belonged to. Several weeks
passed before the captors released a video that revealed in graphic
detail Pearl’s hideous death. It all added up to the vengeful actions
of a terrorist cell that claimed to have perpetrated the killing as a
religious duty. Expressing his profound grief, Musharraf ordered
the arrest of the group suspected to have carried out the act. The
Pakistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs offered its “profound
condolences” to Pearl’s widow and described the murderers as
devoid of all humanity and their act as barbaric and a stain on
Islamic society. The kidnappers had played with the sentiments of
Pakistani society by describing Pearl as a CIA operative and then
as an Israeli intelligence agent. Indeed, Pearl, who was Jewish,
before being beheaded was forced on video to declare his Jewish
identity. Daniel Pearl, one of his captors later exclaimed, was
“anti-Islam and a Jew.”

The Pearl case tested Musharraf’s resolve irrespective of his
vacillation on his secular propensities. By early February the major



Defining the Future 327

culprits in the kidnapping and killing were in custody. The leader
of the band of cut-throats proved to be a British-born Islamic
militant, Ahmad Omar Saeed Sheikh, who confessed during what
was described as intense interrogation. Despite this confession the
affair was put to a formal trial under less than public
circumstances. Musharraf attempted to deflect world public
opinion from the Pearl case by citing India’s plans to detonate
more nuclear weapons. Although New Delhi insisted it had no
intention to detonate more nuclear devices, the two antagonists
continued to mass troops on their mutual border and with this
threat of a new Indo-Pakistan war the Pearl case faded into the
background. Islamabad, however, continued to hammer away at
Indian intransigence on the Kashmir issue and, with the global
community sufficiently aroused, there was no let up in the demand
that India open the door to Kashmiri self-determination.

In February the Pakistan Herald, a popular magazine among the
English-speaking middle class in Pakistan, revealed the results of
a poll it had taken asking the Pakistani public what was the
country’s most pressing problem. The response said much about
the government’s religious dilemma: thirty-one percent declared
unemployment to be the key issue, and twenty-one percent said it
was fear of another war with India. Fifteen percent cited inflation
and various economic problems. When asked about the unending
Kashmir conflict, hardly four percent registered concern. As one
renowned Pakistani columnist put it, “so much for Kashmir being
in our blood.” Kashmir, it was said, cost Pakistan no less than four
billion rupees each year to subsidize the Azad Kashmir govern-
ment. And that sum was a pittance compared with the billions
expended in the perpetual confrontation with India.

Of such stuff was Pakistan’s Islamic revolution made. Moreover,
Musharraf’s attempt to rein in the jihadis, and Pearl’s killing had
done nothing to restore equilibrium to Pakistani society. In late
February, the Pakistan government issued a warning that other
Americans could be targets of militant Islamists. American
diplomatic installations were placed on high alert and U.S. firms
doing business in Pakistan were told to examine their security
measures. The Pakistan Interior Ministry issued a statement noting
“the way the kidnappers executed him [Daniel Pearl] shows
they have made up their mind that they do not care about their



328 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

own future.” Martyrdom had taken on even greater significance
among the jihadis, and the revelation that one of the suicide
bombers that had killed the Afghan Tajik leader, Ahmad Shah
Masud, was a young man with a European education came as no
surprise to those called to combat terrorism. The dance of death
that the jihadis had accepted as their ultimate expression was also
the supreme ritual in their act of faith. That the living were
expected to draw something positive from this display of contem-
porary human sacrifice was difficult to comprehend except among
those who fervently believed that their cause was the destruction
of a world they had no part in making. Attention was drawn to the
spreading influence of al-Qaeda and bin Laden’s formation of the
International Islamic Front for Jihad. That umbrella organization
included, among others, the Pakistani Harkat-ul-Mujahiddin and
Jamaat-ul-Fuqra, the latter a Pakistani organization with roots
inside the United States through Shaikh Mubarik Shah Gillani,
long associated with the ISI. Gillani’s disciples were reported as
living in at least twenty-two American states. Gillani was another
example of the blind leading the blind. Speaking of a conspiracy
against the Islamic people, Gillani claimed there were documents
that proved the aim of the “Zionists” was to divide Pakistan into
four republics. If Gillani was speaking of separate states for
Punjabis, Pashtuns, Sindhis, and Balochis, it remained to be
explained how that would benefit Israel. Gillani also spoke of the
American inquisition against Muslims and said that the growing
Muslim population in America was seen as a looming threat to
Washington and its war on terrorism. The United States, he
declared, wanted to stop the flow of Muslims and purge society
of its Muslim members. When it came to the uses of terror, he
opined, the Americans were the most adept.

But it was in India that the keepers of the Islamic flame faced
their most immediate challenge. Communal warfare was nothing
new to India and riots between the religious communities, notably
the Hindu and the Muslim, had been a constant since the days of
partition. In late February, however, the Indian province of Gujarat
exploded in a mad display of indiscriminate violence. This latest
example of uncivilized behavior was precipitated by a band of
Muslim zealots attacking a train carrying militant Hindus back
from Ayodhya, where a mosque had been destroyed to make way



Defining the Future 329

for the construction of a Hindu temple. In retaliation Hindus
attacked the Muslim community, particularly those living in
Ahmedabad. Before the mayhem subsided weeks later almost a
thousand people had lost their lives, most of them Muslims. The
instigators of the action could no doubt guess the consequences in
attacking the train, but, given their efforts at destabilization, the
loss of innocent life was a small price to pay, no matter how many
innocents were sacrificed. At the very same time, terrorists
described as activists by the Pakistan government attacked a Shiite
mosque in Multan, slaughtering the worshipers at prayer. Those
detained by the police linked responsibility for the assault to the
Lashkar-i-Jhangvi and the Jayash-i-Mohammad, the very organiza-
tions banned and supposedly disbanded a few weeks earlier.
Another Shiite mosque was attacked in Sialkot; the noted scholar
Baqir Hussain Shah was one of the victims. By early March,
Pakistani police had in custody more than two thousand Muslim
militants, the majority from the banned organizations. The
Ministry of the Interior was given responsibility for determining
who was innocent and who dangerous. The government announced
they could hold the detainees no more than three months. If charges
were not then brought against them within that period, by law they
had to be released. But even before the expiration of the detention
order the government decided to release leaders of the Jamaat-i-
Islami and the Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam. Most of the lesser figures who
had been detained were released soon after.

Law enforcement in Pakistan left much to be desired. Following
Musharraf’s speech on January 12, the level of violence rose to
even higher levels. Sectarian clashes between Sunni and Shiite
Muslims were especially bad. Almost every day since the start
of the government’s get-tough policy, slayings and maimings of
Shiites were reported in the daily newspapers. Particular targets
were members of the Shiite professional and business community.
Motorcycle assailants were noticeably active, directing their fire
on shopkeepers and pharmaceutical workers, and academics and
medical doctors. Another Shiite mosque was attacked in
Rawalpindi and again the death toll was in double figures. In a
display of unusual unity Shiites and Ismailis along with concerned
Sunnis drew up a petition that was addressed to President
Musharraf and was also supported by frightened members of



330 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

the Christian, Hindu, Parsi and Buddhist communities. The
petition called upon Musharraf to take the necessary action to
put an end to the killing and disorder: “We ask you General
Musharraf: are you able to sleep in peace surrounded by this ever
widening pool of blood of Shia Pakistanis. . .?”

Musharraf’s oratory had yet to be matched by his actions.
Courageous journalists pointed out that too many criminals had
been provided safe haven in Pakistan simply because they professed
an extreme attachment to Islam. It was their argument that the
commitment to faith did not give Muslims the right to kill. Sheikh
Omar Sayeed, the confessed murderer of Daniel Pearl, had been
released from a jail in India as part of a deal that ended the 1999
hijacking of an Indian airliner. He had served five years in jail for
kidnapping. His violent proclivities were well known to
the Pakistani authorities; nevertheless he was allowed to remain
in Pakistan to perpetrate further crimes, simply because he said he
had found the “true” meaning of religion. It was by such reasoning
that the leader of Jayash-i-Mohammad, also a leader of the terrorist
organization Harkatul Mujahiddin, could justify the assault on the
Indian parliament. Arrested only to be released due to “lack of
evidence,” the would-be violent defenders of faith were clearly a
group that the Pakistani authorities were reluctant to deal with
forcefully. Inter-Services Intelligence links with terrorist organiza-
tions had been well documented, but little if anything had been
done to break the network of government and non-governmental
terrorist organizations working in the name of religion. Terrorism
flourished wherever the writ of the state was weak and ambivalent,
and it remained shrouded in strained religious discourse. Mush-
arraf may have had a life-changing experience and at least in his
public pronouncements he had reversed the course of Pakistan’s
government, but there was no mistaking Pakistan’s immersion in a
high tide of calumny and intrigue.

Realizing the need for concerted action, in March Musharraf
ordered the army, the police, and the intelligence services to act
more aggressively in ferreting out terrorist cells. On March 8 four
such groups were exposed in Karachi and quickly linked with
religious and sectarian killings. Information was also uncovered
about the targeting of Shiite medical doctors in Karachi. The next
day the government announced it intended to expel thousands of



Defining the Future 331

Arab and other foreigners allegedly studying at religious schools in
the country. According to the authorities, there were thirty-six
thousand foreign students in the country, seventeen thousand from
Arab countries. Pakistan was home to more than six hundred
religious institutions with a combined student population of
approximately six hundred thousand. With such a vast pool from
which to draw recruits, it was hardly surprising that hundreds,
even thousands, had been attracted to the many jihadi organiza-
tions. Perhaps sensing their honeymoon days with the Pakistan
government were fleeting, the terrorist cells, heretofore nurtured
by agencies like the ISI, revealed they would not be intimidated. A
Protestant church frequented by American diplomats and their
families in Islamabad was invaded by grenade-wielding militants
who killed a number of worshippers. The U.S. government
advised all Americans in Pakistan to practice caution, noting the
increased risk and the impossibility of determining in advance the
terrorists’ next target. Subsequently, Washington ordered all non-
essential diplomats in Pakistan to leave the country. Americans,
however, were not the only ones at risk. On March 19 another
motorcycle attack, this time in Lahore, took the lives of a Sunni
scholar and a Shiite leader. Again the government’s response was
an expressed determination to identify and eliminate the terrorists,
but, as one government official put it, “every inch of the country’s
land cannot be monitored.” United States CIA director George
Tenet seemed to echo that thought when he announced the war on
terrorism had entered a new and more difficult phase, saying the
terrorists had adopted small-unit operations in “a classical
insurgency format.”

Under constant verbal abuse from New Delhi for his failure to
effectively neutralize the jihadis, Musharraf lashed out at the
Vajpayee government and in an emotional response declared that
New Delhi might well examine and control its own Hindu
extremists. Describing Indian assaults on his government as
“offensive,” Musharraf declared that Pakistan would not tolerate
being treated “like dirt, as if we are some kind of scum, a very
weak country, which cannot handle itself.” Under pressure from
the sustained Indian build-up on Pakistan’s frontier, the continuing
war in Afghanistan and its spillover effects, and the frustrating war
against terrorist cells in his own country, Musharraf was forced to



332 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

shatter all ties with the militant Islamist orders, including those
operating in Kashmir. The government revealed that Islamabad
and Washington were working on more intimate ties between the
United States FBI and CIA and Pakistani intelligence services.
American use of high-tech surveillance equipment, unavailable to
Pakistan law enforcers, had been tracking al-Qaeda and Taliban
agents, many of whom had found refuge in Pakistan. These data
were now being used by Pakistani intelligence and assault units
ordered to encircle and seize alleged terrorists. An indication that
the closer working relationship was beginning to show rich
dividends was the capture in Karachi of Abu Zubaydah and
Ramzi bin Al-Shaiba, members of bin Laden’s inner circle. Both
al-Qaeda leaders were quickly transferred to American custody.

The real Musharraf reforms?

For a brief period in April terrorism took a backseat to politics.
Insisting on holding onto his multiple roles and having already
extended his term as Chief of the Army Staff, General Musharraf
called for a referendum on his status as the country’s principal
political leader. Following in the tradition of Field Marshal Ayub
Khan and General Zia ul-Haq, Musharraf announced the holding
of a national referendum to give him an additional five-year term
as President and Chief Executive. The October 2002 poll for the
national and provincial legislatures would not change the outcome
of this referendum. Challenged by criticism from every quarter,
the General deflected all opposition to his plan, arguing that the
country needed his brand of leadership and that his administration
had much to do to restore Pakistan’s political system to a level of
equilibrium. Describing himself as a “democrat,” Musharraf
stressed his determination to restore true democracy in the
country. Again arguing that Benazir’s and Sharif’s governments
had failed to promote an equitable political process, had exploited
their high office for personal gain, and had destroyed the people’s
confidence in competitive politics, the General-President said there
was no alternative to his remaining in power. With the country
challenged by militant Muslim extremists, only the combined
efforts of the country’s security forces could hope to bring an end
to the havoc, and he was in the best position to lead that struggle.



Defining the Future 333

With the referendum scheduled for April 30, Musharraf met
with many of the country’s active politicians to review the law and
order situation and to explain the need for a “legal” extension of
his authority. Sensitive to criticism, however, the General was not
ready to listen to dissenting views, especially from officials in his
administration. As he made the rounds to stump for support, a
rally in Faisalabad turned ugly when journalists covering the event
were pummeled by the police. The Punjab governor, a protégé of
the President, was accused of ordering the manhandling of the
newspapermen. In response the governor criticized the press for
what he believed was its mendacious reporting. The journalists,
however, had the last word when their influential unions
condemned the police baton charge and the bloodying of a number
of their colleagues. The journalists declared the government could
not have both a free and a gagged press at the same time.
Musharraf was heavily criticized for his apparent decision to
thwart an independent assessment of the referendum. Moreover,
because of the attack on the press, all the political parties,
previously paralyzed by the military government, had been given
an open invitation to condemn the projected referendum.
Musharraf, however, was not about to alter his plans. Arguing
that his government had already empowered people at the
grassroots, had stimulated a lackluster economy, had strengthened
national unity, and had enhanced Pakistan’s prestige in the world
community, he now wanted the population to indicate their
support for a continuation of his policies. Asserting the referendum
was a constitutional act, the General believed the people would
see through the diatribe of his detractors and vote for the
restoration of democratic government by giving him another five
years.

Musharraf’s timing was significant. The country had in fact seen
an improvement in its economy. Foreign reserves had risen from
U.S.$0.5 billion to U.S.$5.5 billion and Musharraf said never
again would government officials be allowed to plunder the
country’s wealth. Claiming his was a selfless administration, he
noted that previous elected governments had looted the treasury
and contributed nothing to the well-being of the people. For too
long the country had been made subject to a feudal leadership that
nurtured corruption and nepotism. Those days, said Musharraf,



334 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

would not return. Democracy meant nothing if its benefits were
directed only at the few. His administration, he declared, was
centered on reducing poverty and this meant helping the masses
of poor. The referendum that he had ordered was meant to bring
the people into good relations with the government and to seek
popular support for the policies already in train. As a demonstration
of his resolve Musharraf announced the granting of proprietary
rights to landless farmers wherever state land was available. He
also declared that villages not yet electrified would be given high
priority. Musharraf also stressed the need to repair barrages and
canals and to improve the country’s irrigation systems. The
President said it was his expectation that all development targets
would be met before his new five-year term in office expired.
However, Musharraf’s forecast of economic success depended on
the funds made available by the Asian Development Bank, the
World Bank and International Monetary Fund, and the United
States, which had offered to compensate Pakistan for much of its
costs in the war on terrorism. This the General did not wish to
publicize.

Musharraf could not understand why there was so much
opposition to the referendum, in particular the fear registered by
the informed public that the referendum would not be a free
expression of the people. His critics had convinced much of the
population that the referendum was not democratic practice. Put
forward by the military government, it could only enhance the
dictatorial powers of the General-President, who might, if given
the opportunity, make himself President for life. The politicians
complained that the October elections could produce a legislature
and a Prime Minister, but they would be so weak and their powers
so confined that together they would be little more than a rubber
stamp for the Musharraf government. Musharraf had spoken of
the need for a system of checks and balances. His critics saw his
program as more check and virtually no balance at all. Even
before the referendum could be held, Musharraf spoke of
amendments to the constitution that were intended to restructure
the political system. Citing among his critics Benazir and Sharif,
who he said were “sitting outside Pakistan . . . trying to destabilize
the system,” Musharraf said he deplored confrontational politics,
believing it to be counterproductive. The country, he said, could



Defining the Future 335

no longer tolerate conflict between the government and the
President and it was his intention to secure the presidency against
those who would weaken it. A reminder of Ayub Khan’s
preference for the presidential over the parliamentary system,
Ayub spoke of the “genius” of the Pakistani people and their
unfamiliarity with democratic practice. Like Ayub, Musharraf
wanted to separate the masses from the politicians’ intrigues, and
hence he acknowledged the legislature’s role in making law but
rejected its claim to executive powers.

Despite the protest meetings and petitions calling for the
rescinding of the referendum, it was held on schedule on April 30;
those casting ballots gave Musharraf the expected resounding
victory. With politicians calling upon their constituents to remain
at home and with the MQM officially boycotting the election,
voter turnout was low but nevertheless Musharraf won a stellar
victory. The government claimed that of the 61.90 million eligible
voters seventy percent had gone to the polls, a number disputed by
the opposition but nevertheless the only figure readily available.
Thus out of a total of 43.39 million said to have voted, Musharraf
received ninety-eight percent of the votes polled: 40.02 million.
As stated under the Referendum Order of 2002: “If the majority
of votes cast in the referendum are in the affirmative, the people of
Pakistan shall be deemed to have given [a] democratic mandate
to General Pervez Musharraf to serve the nation as President of
Pakistan for a period of five years.” The period of five years was
to be computed from the first meeting of the Majlis-i-Shura or
parliament that was to be elected in October 2002. Constitutional
lawyers therefore questioned whether the President’s term could
be made official without the validation of parliament, or else the
Supreme Court. Cynics argued that the President would never
tolerate a negative vote by the national legislature and that the
question of a future parliament approving the referendum was
moot. Musharraf therefore still faced the task of demonstrating
whether democracy could be restored to the beleaguered nation.
The General’s insistence that the National Security Council would
be given ultimate authority to approve or reject the President’s
mandate also appeared to make a sham of the democratic process.
What Musharraf meant by democracy therefore remained unclear,
but certainly parliament’s powers were to be circumscribed and in



336 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

no way would it be allowed to frame a challenge to the Chief
Executive. Ayub Khan had tried “Basic Democracy” and Bhutto
had made some reference to “People’s Democracy,” but Musharraf
wanted neither of those systems. Given the army’s central role in
the ongoing political process, it was obvious that the democracy of
which he spoke had more to do with the guardians in Plato’s
Republic than the representative government of Locke’s Second
Treatise.

The higher bureaucrats and army generals had demonstrated
their contempt for the politicians since the early years of
independence. That perception had only been reinforced with
the passing decades. Military rule was a consequence of the failure
of the country’s political leaders to address the major issues of
provincialism, corruption, and nepotism, and Pakistan had paid a
high price in blood and wealth as a result of leadership failure. The
generals who interposed themselves between the politicians and
the people of Pakistan fared no better and generally acted no more
selflessly or professionally than the politicians, but the frequency
of military takeovers had over the years blurred the lines between
the army generals and the politicians. Given the intimate
association of the one with the other a point was reached in the
1990s when it was believed best to provide the military with a
formal role in the political process. Instead of assuming that the
politicians represented democracy, and the army autocracy, it
seemed a propitious time to accept the intertwining of the one
with the other. Neither had an absolute claim on democracy, nor
did either show a greater tendency toward authoritarianism.

The proposal for the creation of a National Security Council
(NSC), composed mainly of the highest-ranking officers of the
armed forces, was rejected when initially proposed, but the realities
of Pakistani politics did not allow it to disappear. It took the
Musharraf coup of October 1999 and the events of September 11,
2001 to give the NSC substance and the necessary momentum to
make it an integral part of Pakistan’s constitutional system. With a
war on terrorism likely to continue indefinitely and the nation’s
politicians far too limited in ability and government experience,
the military had to maintain its proactive political role, with or
without Musharraf. Moreover, if democracy, or a manifestation of
it, was to be pursued as a national goal, it was beginning to dawn



Defining the Future 337

on Pakistanis that the army might become less the periodic
disturber of the democratic process and more a positive force in
constitutional development. Ayub Khan in the 1960s expressed
the view that Pakistan was not prepared for the Western model of
democracy but that the country could begin to manage a
democratic process that reflected its condition and time. Some
four decades later, and as a consequence of the global struggle
with terrorism, that view had finally acquired a modicum of
acceptance.

Punctuating this issue, after the referendum an MQM strike shut
down Karachi and disturbances produced bombings in the city that
forced the army and paramilitary forces to respond. The politics of
violence had long swirled around the activities of the MQM and
this latest disruption was just one more example of the failure of
political parties to reinforce civil society in the country’s largest
metropolis. Still another indiscriminate act of violence was the
killing, this time in Lahore, of Dr. Murtaza Malik, another noted
religious scholar, who was gunned down as he left his home. In
addition to his death were those of Dr. Nishat Malik, Mustafa
Kamal Rizvi, and school principal Zafar Zaidi, all residing in
Karachi. The newspaper Dawn in an opinion piece on March 18
cited the killing of more than one hundred medical doctors
by unidentified assassins. The column also spoke of the killings of
Christians in Bahawalpur and Islamabad and the total inability
of the government to protect the innocent. As the purveyors of
violence continued to target the most sophisticated members
of Pakistani society, a more publicized act of terror occurred on
May 8. Suicide bombers drove their car into the side of a bus that
was ferrying French technicians and engineers to and from the
Karachi port facilities, where they were assisting in the construc-
tion of three French-designed Pakistani submarines. The event
occurred in broad daylight, outside the Sheraton Hotel in the
central part of the city. Eleven French citizens lost their lives in that
attack, allegedly the work of al-Qaeda and Taliban cells.
Following this latest incident Musharraf called a meeting of the
National Security Council and heads of the different intelligence
services. Federal Interior Secretary Tasnim Noorani reported that
approximately three hundred al-Qaeda and Taliban suicide
bombers had infiltrated the country and that many of them were



338 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

expected to unleash themselves on the public. Acknowledging that
still more concerted action against terrorism was necessary,
Musharraf announced there would be more cooperation with
American, British, and French intelligence agencies and that the
country’s borders would have to be tightened further, if necessary
in concert with American and other international forces operating
in Afghanistan. He said that sixty thousand regular Pakistan army
personnel had been deployed on the Afghan border, and that the
number was to be increased to the extent it did not jeopardize
Pakistan’s defenses along the border with India. Although
invitations to foreign intelligence and military units were not
popular in Pakistan, the Pakistani generals were compelled to
admit they could not alone expect to neutralize a multiple ongoing
threat.

The United States asked for Pakistan’s permission to send its
special forces into the Pashtun tribal areas, generally off limits
even to Pakistani regular forces. Washington had received
intelligence that al-Qaeda was operating in Waziristan, and there
was even speculation bin Laden had been given refuge there. The
region was already seething with anti-American sentiments, and
so penetration of the mountain fortifications, in official Pakistani
opinion, was not worth the increased hatred that would be stirred
up. Islamabad signaled Washington that it would be better to
monitor movements in Waziristan from Pakistan, where al-Qaeda
agents would be more exposed. Indeed, al-Qaeda and Taliban
activists were allegedly paying smugglers huge sums for entry into
Pakistan. The killing of four terrorists in Multan on May 14
underlined the utility of that strategy. Believed to be al-Qaeda and
associated with Lashkar-i-Jhangvi, within this cell, according to
Pakistani authorities, was an assassin wanted for the killing of an
Iranian diplomat. Acknowledging the closer cooperation between
United States and Pakistani intelligence, U.S. Defense Secretary
Donald Rumsfeld publicly praised Islamabad’s contribution and
hinted that larger efforts were in the offing.

The May issue of Fortune magazine, however, indicated the
cooperation between Washington and Islamabad was still
insufficient for the test imposed on the nations combating global
terrorism. Pakistan was said to have the largest number of
terrorists in the world, and informed Pakistanis were the first to



Defining the Future 339

admit that the country had been so long exposed to terrorist
activity that rooting it out would require resources not yet
imagined. It was nevertheless perplexing how successive Islamabad
governments had allowed such conditions to develop. Afghanistan
may have been the beginning of Pakistan’s current dilemma, but
the problem of Afghanistan was compounded by myopic Pakistani
officials, too many of them in uniform, who saw Afghanistan as a
proxy partner in the war with India. In creating the Taliban,
Islamabad had enhanced bin Laden’s legions, not Pakistan’s
national security. If Islamabad at one time had tried to influence
the course of Afghanistan’s history, by 2002 it was all too obvious
Islamabad’s Forward Policy had rolled back on itself. It was now
left to the Americans and the European nations, working with
Musharraf, to salvage what they could from the ghost of Pakistan-
past. Informed Pakistani opinion mused that the American
presence in the region had given Musharraf the opportunity to
re-chart Pakistan’s future.

With an estimated one million Indian troops massed along
Pakistan’s frontier, New Delhi was seemingly eager to take
advantage of the war on terrorism to strike at alleged terrorist
bases in Pakistan and Azad Kashmir. More than Pakistan’s nuclear
deterrent, it was again the United States that appeared to hold back
a vengeful Indian onslaught. Pakistan’s strategy in Afghanistan in
shambles, its armed forces split between its two hostile borders,
Pakistan, like India, had cited the horrors of nuclear war ad
nauseum. Nevertheless, in a statement made at the United Nations,
Pakistan’s ambassador declared his government could not promise
a “no first strike” policy if India precipitated an attack and
Pakistan could not effectively respond with conventional forces.
With Pakistani and Indian forces on high alert, no one could
forecast outcomes. Moreover, Islamabad’s efforts to convince New
Delhi of the necessity for withdrawing forces from forward
positions were fruitless. New Delhi pointed to the almost daily
terrorist attacks in Kashmir and on each occasion attributed the
sustained assault to Islamabad’s actions and policies. Thus despite
the ongoing war against terrorism and the increased cooperation
between Islamabad and Washington, New Delhi did not see how
any of the registered successes against al-Qaeda and the Taliban
benefited India’s situation in Kashmir.



340 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

In the face of what Pakistan regarded as Indian intransigence,
Musharraf’s Information Minister, Nisar Memon, called upon all
Pakistanis, from all political persuasions, to rally behind the
President and the Pakistan army. Arguing this was not the time for
politics as usual, he cautioned the opposition not to fall prey to
Indian machinations. The inference was that Pakistan was in a
fight for its survival and that these critical conditions demanded the
suspension of partisan criticism. An All Parties Conference (APC),
comprising twenty-four political and religious organizations, was
convened in Lahore on May 19, but it was not the meeting the
government had called for. Rather, the APC condemned both
Musharraf and India and called for the establishment of a
caretaker government that would present a more formidable
challenge to New Delhi. Calling for a “full-time” Chief of the
Army Staff, the politicians wanted Musharraf out of government
and out of the army. The APC’s more vocal organizations were
represented by the Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy and
the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal. The religious leaders were especially
provoked, insisting on the removal of Musharraf and arguing that
Pakistan’s security would be enhanced if the General stepped
aside. Musharraf, they declared, was indispensable to the
Americans, not to Pakistan. In its principal resolution, the APC
declared that Musharraf “stands discredited and lacks the stature
and moral authority to deal with the current threat to national
security and territorial integrity of Pakistan.” The conference also
questioned why Pakistan maintained thousands of troops on the
border with Afghanistan if in fact the country was threatened by
an imminent attack from India. Finally, referring to Benazir and
Sharif, the APC wanted the government to explain how it could
speak of fair and unfettered elections when major political party
leaders had been denied the right to participate.

Musharraf’s fundamentalist political opposition refused to
acknowledge the war on terrorism as a Pakistani affair. Convinced
that the Americans had foisted the war on the region for purposes
that served their own interests, the Islamists insisted Musharraf
had joined Washington because this alliance provided the needed
façade behind which the General-President could sustain his
personal accumulation of power. Seeming to argue they had
nothing to fear from either al-Qaeda or the Taliban, the Islamists’



Defining the Future 341

immediate concern was the removal of the U.S. presence. In the
absence of the United States, Musharraf would become irrelevant.
The Americans, according to the jihadi sympathizers among the
politicians, stood not for the restoration of democracy but for the
reinforcing of autocratic government and the stifling of the voice
of the Pakistani nation. Even when strong evidence was collected
demonstrating al-Qaeda’s shift to Pakistan, few Pakistanis were
greatly aroused, so blinded were they by their hatred of
Musharraf. Only a few were prepared to recognize suicide
bombing or other violent acts of terror as something forbidden
(haram) in Islamic teaching. Also given the fundamentalists’
hatred for the United States, there was ample evidence to suggest
that al-Qaeda agents escaping from Afghanistan would find
sufficient numbers of Pakistanis prepared to conceal and support
them. It was not surprising therefore that twelve Arab members of
al-Qaeda were taken from upper-class dwellings in Hayatabad
and University Town in Karachi on May 29. Aided by the
American FBI agents who had tracked the men, the Pakistan
special forces transferred all of them to American custody after
their capture. The captives were said to hail from Jordan, Sudan,
Somalia, Syria, Iraq, Kuwait, Palestine, and Algeria. A number of
Pakistanis were also arrested for complicity in harboring
dangerous criminals.

One indication that the frontline in the war on terrorism had
shifted from Afghanistan to Pakistan was the election in
Afghanistan on June 2 to select delegates to attend the Loya
Jirga. With American special forces and support aircraft striking at
suspected remaining al-Qaeda bases on Afghanistan’s extreme
eastern and southern frontier, and with a multinational force of
peacekeepers providing a semblance of tranquility in Kabul,
Afghanistan was able to proceed with its stabilization policy.
Nevertheless, U.S. forces had not yet been given permission to strike
at possible terrorist camps on the Pakistani side of the frontier.
Pakistan therefore provided friendlier ground for the remnants of
al-Qaeda and the Taliban. Pakistani intelligence officers living
among the tribal people were known to provide safe passage to
Taliban officials – like that granted the Taliban Deputy Foreign
Minister, Abdul Rahman Zaid, and General Jalil Yousafzai, a
senior Defense Ministry official. Both men were allowed to attend



342 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

a social function in the Pakistani tribal belt and then disappear.
Moreover, reports circulated about other wanted terrorist officials
who were living comfortably in Quetta and Peshawar. One of this
number, Maulvi Agha Jan, a Taliban defense official, brazenly
announced that he considered Osama bin Laden a “a true patriot”
and that despite their efforts the Americans would never be able to
catch him. Bin Laden simply had too many allies among the tribal
Pashtuns and they would never betray him, no matter how much
money was offered for his arrest.

Al-Qaeda and the Taliban thus drifted into and regrouped in
Pakistan, and others moved their operations to Kashmir. On June
4, speaking in Kazakhstan, Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari
Vajpayee warned of this shift in the war on terrorism, noting that
his country was close to the epicenter of religious extremism and
its attendant violence. Focusing his eyes on General Musharraf,
who was also present for this summit meeting of South and
Central Asian leaders, the Indian Prime Minister excoriated the
Pakistani President for failing the keep his promise to halt cross-
border terrorism. Russian President Vladimir Putin, also present at
the meeting, was obliged to warn both South Asian leaders that
their failure to begin a process of reconciliation was threatening
the entire region. Moreover, because they were nuclear powers, if
they failed to submit their grievances to dispute resolution, the
consequences of their actions could be disastrous for the entire
world. Picking up on Putin’s concern, Musharraf left the meeting
with an offer to Vajpayee to open an unconditional dialog.
Vajpayee’s response was direct: New Delhi had nothing to discuss
until Pakistan destroyed the ability of the terrorists to use
Pakistani soil for their attacks in Kashmir. Britain’s Foreign
Minister and the U.S. Deputy Secretary of State also applied
pressure on the two disputants, but it was Musharraf who was
forced to accept the greater burden. In response, the Pakistani
President offered another proposal, this time for an international
patrol to function along the line of control. New Delhi rejected
that idea as well. Later, however, India offered joint patrols of the
line of control, but now it was Islamabad’s turn to reject the
proposal. While Pakistan and India remained poised for war, King
Zahir Shah, after a twenty-nine-year exile, returned to Afghanistan,
and on June 10 fifteen hundred delegates from across Afghanistan



Defining the Future 343

gathered in Kabul for their Loya Jirga. The Loya Jirga’s goal was
the establishment of a more secure transitional government that
could begin the long process of reconstruction in the war-ravaged
country. After several days of speechmaking and raucous politics,
Hamid Karzai, the interim Afghan leader, was elected Afghanistan’s
head of state.

In Pakistan, however, it was business as usual. Not in any way
subdued by Musharraf’s actions against the Islamists and their
jihadi colleagues, the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal took the opportu-
nity to meet with Musharraf to discuss what they deemed to be a
shift in his government’s Kashmir policy. The Islamists not only
came with a list of demands for continued and substantial support
for the Muslim guerrillas in Kashmir, but also wanted specific
constitutional issues addressed. They called upon Musharraf to
dismiss his chief election commissioner and to replace him with an
unbiased officer of the Pakistani bar. They also asked for the lifting
of restrictions on the parties and on those politicians denied the
opportunity to participate in the October elections. Maulana
Fazlur Rahman, leader of one faction of the Jamiat-Ulema-i-
Pakistan, however, argued that the franchise must be denied to
members of the Qadiani community, especially if they insisted on
voting as Muslims. The Islamists also condemned Musharraf’s
decision to invite assistance from the United States and Europe;
they hinted that the General’s actions verged on blasphemy.

The Islamists displayed no remorse when on June 14 a car bomb
was detonated outside the American consulate in Karachi, causing
significant loss of life. Deemed the work of the Harkatul
Mujahiddin al-Alami, an order was issued for the immediate
arrest of the group’s leaders. The U.S. Secretary of Defense,
Donald Rumsfeld, had met with President Musharraf in Islama-
bad only the day before the suicide attack. It appeared the bomb
was meant to send a message to both leaders that their war on
terrorism was not succeeding and that the Americans would be
wise to leave the country. The more conventional party leaders
denounced the bombing and instead directed their fire against the
ISI. The PPP, in particular, condemned the intelligence agency for
harassing and intimidating politicians as well as providing support
for candidates prepared to do its bidding. The ISI was also
condemned for influencing the outcome of local council elections



344 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

and for trying to convince party members to defect to the
Musharraf Muslim League faction. Citing the ISI’s failure in
Kargil, in Afghanistan, and in Kashmir, the PPP held the
directorate responsible for the threat of nuclear war that hung
over the country.

In July, speaking for the government, Brigadier Mukhtar Sheikh
noted the “lethal alliance” between local militants and al-Qaeda
terrorists. Calling for the need to alter the public perception, he
also said the government had awakened to the necessity of
painting the terrorists in “their true colors.” For the first time
declaring jihadi groups like Lashkar-i-Jhangvi “terrorists” not
“freedom fighters,” he appealed to the public to recognize the
danger they posed to the country. The connection between the
militant organizations and the Islamist parties was not mentioned
but the implications were obvious. The Islamists had to be taken
seriously. It was the public’s sentimental support for the causes
they represented that drew large numbers of the Pakistani
population to identify with them. Nevertheless Musharraf’s
policies were aimed at neutralizing the more conventional
politicians, who were more likely to challenge his authority. On
July 8 a ban was imposed on third-term aspirations for politicians
who had already served two terms as head of the federal
government or head of a provincial government. The govern-
ment’s justification for the action was the need for “new blood,”
but the ban was fashioned specifically with Benazir and Sharif in
mind. Under no circumstances did Musharraf want Pakistan’s
leading national politicians competing with his own slate of
officers. Sharif’s Muslim League and Benazir’s PPP were outraged
by the decree. Saying no individual could personally amend the
constitution, PPP spokesmen declared the Qualification to Hold
Public Office Order 2002 mala fide and commented it was a crude
attempt to subvert the will of the people. Moreover, the order
violated fundamental rights of the individual seeking office and
denied the voter a legitimate preference. It was also a violation of
the principle of parliamentary government. Stating that only
Articles 238 and 239 of the 1973 constitution provided procedure
for amending the constitution, they said that the order, rather than
opening the political process to political normalcy, threatened the
foundations of the state.



Defining the Future 345

Musharraf’s attempt to marginalize the conventional parties
while encouraging Pakistanis to abandon the Islamists made sense
to himself, but it remained to be seen how the war on terrorism
could be managed and at the same time democracy could be
revitalized. Musharraf’s dubious and contradictory posture
depended on the support he received from his military–technocrat
power base and the success of the Americans in neutralizing
al-Qaeda, strengthening the Hamid Karzai government in
Afghanistan, and holding the Indians at bay. The Musharraf
administration issued still other edicts – the Political Parties Order
2002 and the Election Order 2002 – that added further obstacles
to politicians attempting to ply their trade. One provision laid
down a minimum educational qualification of a college or
university baccalaureate for anyone wishing to serve in the national
or provincial assemblies. The Supreme Court unanimously upheld
this requirement. Petitioners had argued violation of their
fundamental rights as guaranteed under Article 17 of the
constitution. Accusing the military regime of attempting to create
an “aristocratic class” of legislators, the opposition declared the
government wanted to control a parliament without serious
competition. The Court’s decision was final; no reasons were given
for its judgment. It was pointed out that in a country with a high
illiteracy rate only 1.32 percent of the total population possessed
academic degrees and most college graduates resided in the urban
areas. The Court ruling meant that seventy-nine members of the
National Assembly and twenty-two Senators, including Benazir
Bhutto, who obtained an Oxford Diploma but did not earn a B.A.
degree, failed to meet the test.

It was not surprising therefore that the political opposition
would warn against the military’s deeper role in Pakistani politics.
The numerous edicts as well as the decision to proceed with the
formal establishment of the National Security Council pointed to
a Pakistani military with a permanent place in the political process
and a position far superior to that of the elected politicians. A
protest procession in Multan organized by the Alliance for the
Restoration of Democracy attempted to air grievances with the
Musharraf administration, but the police blocked their path. As
they attempted to get around the police cordon, a number were
arrested, but not before they had registered their dissatisfaction



346 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

with the regime. Calling for Musharraf’s resignation, the protestors
demanded the immediate formation of an interim government and
the withdrawal of the restrictions imposed on politicians.
Musharraf ignored their plea. It was difficult to see how he
intended to win the support of the conventional parties or restore
democratic practices in the country.

On July 12 Musharraf made a two-hour address to the nation in
which he declared the country had been put back on to the road
of progress and prosperity. He emphasized his government’s
independence in eliminating threats to the country’s security. He
also spoke of economic matters that were causing distress among
consumers. He assured the nation that the new Prime Minister
would enjoy full powers without interference from the President
or the armed forces. At the same time, the President declared he
did not intend to act as a rubber stamp and that his powers would
extend beyond the ceremonial. The Prime Minister would be
subject to the scrutiny of the people, and beyond that to the
National Security Council acting in consultation with the
President. Moreover, the NSC would include political leaders,
including the leader of the opposition, so that a consensus could
be arrived at on major national issues. Article 58(2)(b), providing
special prerogatives to the President, would be restored but subject
to the constraints imposed by the NSC. Saying the Prime Minister
would have the capacity to set his or her own foreign and
economic policy, Musharraf said the purpose of the constitutional
amendments was to ensure good governance, not to usurp the
powers of the head of government or weaken the democratic
process. Musharraf declared he was not “power hungry” and that
he sought a system of checks and balances that would obviate
the need to impose martial law in the future. If successful, his
amendments would prevent the army from again interfering in the
country’s political affairs. Musharraf assured those afraid of
the NSC that it would not be a super-constitutional body or have
dominance over the legislature and executive. Its prime task would
be to maintain a working relationship between the army, the
President, and the Prime Minister.

Responsibility for announcing the new amendments to the
constitution was given to the National Reconstruction Bureau,
which made several presentations in mid-July. Twenty-nine



Defining the Future 347

constitutional amendments had been developed to give substance
to Musharraf’s vision of a more effective, more stable, more
forward-looking political system. Under the terms of the amend-
ments the President was granted the power to dismiss the
parliament. The National Security Council was formally estab-
lished to oversee the functioning of parliamentary government and
to work in concert with the President and the armed forces.
Moreover, the Prime Minister and parliament would be prevented
from rearranging the system to the detriment of the Chief
Executive. The opposition parties were not pleased and their cries
of “Dictatorship” and “Fascism” were loud and clear. The
Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal rejected the entire package, saying the
amendments would do the reverse of what Musharraf intended –
would unleash a confrontation between the government and the
President. Arguing that the amendments humiliated the entire
nation, the Amal refused to permit any “individual with his coterie
of experts . . . [to] bind the coming generations.” Commenting on
the weakness built into the Prime Minister’s office, the Islamists
angrily declared that the head of government would be nothing
more than a hostage of the country’s military Chief Executive. The
“rug could be pulled from his feet anytime.”

Although Musharraf turned a deaf ear to these complaints, on
July 22 the government announced it had amended the Political
Parties Order 2002 to remove the college degree requirement for
those seeking or holding political office. This reversal was hardly
soothing balm to those depressed by the state of affairs. Believing
that the United States secretly approved of Musharraf’s putsch, the
regime’s critics declared Pakistan was headed for a “a Hosni
Mubarak-style or Suharto type of military-cum-civilian dispensa-
tion.” The United States, it was said, “likes pliant regimes and the
one now holding the Pakistani flag has been more pliant than
most.” Some political pundits called for a union between Sharif’s
Muslim League and Benazir’s PPP. Their idea included isolating
the “Beards of the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal.” They also hoped to
force Musharraf and the generals to come to grips with a defiant,
sophisticated, and unified political opposition. The mere thought
that salvation for Pakistan lay in the return of the two discredited
politicians revealed the extent of the political bankruptcy
burdening the nation.



348 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

It was clear from the ensuing debate that few in Pakistan bought
Musharraf’s argument that a permanent place for the armed forces
in the country’s political system was in the best interest of the
nation. Nor did they believe it was the only way to satisfy
democratic aspirations. By the end of July all the political parties
had rejected Musharraf’s proposed constitutional package and the
Political Parties Order 2002. In a surprise announcement, however,
Musharraf declared that nothing had been finalized and that he
now contemplated implementing only the essential and immediate
amendments. The others, he said, would be left to the future
parliament to deliberate. Explaining he had been listening to the
people, Musharraf declared that a cross-section of the Pakistani
public were in favor of the reforms, despite the well-publicized
disdain of the political opposition. Therefore it was with the people
in mind that he had decided to forgo ruling on all the amendments.
However, he did not delay action on the National Security Council
or its role in working with the Chief Executive to assure a strong
presidency. At the same time Musharraf wanted it understood that
he would not interfere in the work of the new Prime Minister and
that he expected the head of government to dominate all state
matters. Again he tired to convince Pakistanis that as President he
would act against a Prime Minister only in time of crisis and then
only with the full knowledge, support, and approval of the
National Security Council. Prime Ministers were not interfered
with in the past until their behavior endangered the nation. Martial
law was the ultimate result. Musharraf’s plan sought to assure
honest and effective administration. It was also intended to prevent
the frequent imposition of military rule. Musharraf clearly
assumed an integrity in the men in uniform which made them fit
guardians of the country’s political system as well as its territorial
integrity; given popular suspicions concerning past experience with
generals in politics, however, people had ample reason to be
skeptical.

Prelude to an election

Sidetracked by the President-General, the Islamists poured their
energy into attacking the Musharraf government, especially for its
crackdown on the religious schools. Government reforms called



Defining the Future 349

for changes in the recruitment of students, course instruction, and
extra-pedagogical activities, namely, exercises in the use of
firearms, bomb making, and guerrilla training. Intent on curbing
religious extremism, the government insisted on higher standards
of education and on teacher responsibility as well as overall
probity. In reaction, the religious parties called for demonstrations
and protest meetings in Islamabad and urged the public to vote for
them in the October elections if they wanted ever to regain control
of their schools and country. Only the religious parties, they said,
would repeal the anti-madrassah decrees, and if given a popular
mandate the Islamists promised to force the government to
withdraw all restrictive ordinances. A reminder of what lay behind
the madrassah reforms had been again demonstrated in the killing
of nine German tourists by Islamic militants who attacked their
bus while they were touring archaeological sites on the North
West Frontier. The government attributed the assault to al-Qaeda
or Taliban elements that they said were determined to point up the
weakness of the Musharraf regime.

The religious organizations also expressed dissatisfaction with
decisions taken at a meeting of the Association of South East Asian
Nations (ASEAN). The Association had pointed to Pakistan’s
aggressive tactics in Kashmir and called for an end to terrorism
there. The organization’s spokesperson announced acceptance of a
comprehensive pact with the United States that aimed at
combating terrorism worldwide. No mention, however, was made
of India’s use of terror in retaining control of the disputed state.
Pakistani Islamists demanded a distinction be drawn between
those fighting for self-government and those engaged in random
acts of violence. Although seeking to separate itself from the more
militant Islamists, Islamabad was compelled to make the same
argument. The Musharraf government questioned how ASEAN
could point to Pakistan’s responsibility in the continuing violence
in Kashmir, but could so completely ignore New Delhi’s tactics in
denying the Kashmiris their political and human rights. India’s
capacity to avoid criticism and the minimal attention given to
communal riots in Gujarat were yet another indication to
Pakistanis that a double standard applied. It was almost as if
India could do no wrong whereas Pakistan could do nothing right.
Thus even though Musharraf had thrown in his lot with the



350 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

United States in the war on terrorism, there was still little to
impress the Pakistani public. India could proceed with its Kashmir
elections, it could also threaten to deny its airspace to Pakistani
aircraft, but there was little Islamabad could do other than display
its defiance. When India’s Kashmir Chief Minister, Farooq
Abdullah, declared on August 7 that India had no alternative
but to strike at militant camps across the border in Pakistan,
Pakistani resolve was more in evidence. Musharraf not only
repeated his government’s official policy about there being no
terrorist camps in Pakistan, but said that any overt action by India
on Pakistani soil would be met by a swift response. The hardened
nature of India’s claim to Kashmir prevented Musharraf from fully
separating himself from the jihadis, and the jihadis were content to
keep the Kashmir pot boiling and leave Musharraf to wonder
what he might do next.

Musharraf’s dilemma surfaced again when in August another
Christian church, this one in Murree, not far from Rawalpindi and
Islamabad, was attacked and six people were killed. Although all
the dead were Pakistanis, the incident once more pointed to a
chain of violence that led directly to the militant Islamists. No
target was off limits, no installation or institution was sacred, and
no life was worth preserving. The purveyors of violence were all of
the same character and all intertwined, and none among them was
prepared to question their behavior or the enormous damage
caused. In an editorial linking the Murree attack to so many others
the newspaper Dawn noted that “terrorism is now Pakistan’s
foremost problem. Without rooting out this menace in all its
forms, the economy cannot pick up, nor can political stability be
achieved, whether the government is military or democratic.” This
was the way the international network of terrorists punished
Pakistan for joining the United States in the war against terrorism.
The perpetrators of the Murree attack allegedly acted on
instructions from the global network. Soft targets like churches
were now preferable in sowing disorder and uncertainty. Mosques
too were targeted to cause Muslims to question the inability of
government to protect them and to raise new questions about
Islamabad’s ties to Washington. Dedicated to the art of
psychological warfare, the terrorists aimed to strike terror in the
minds of ordinary people.



Defining the Future 351

Countering such a strategy became the primary concern of the
Pakistan government. A meeting in early August of Afghan
security officials with a delegation led by Pakistani corps
commander Lieutenant-General Abdul Quadir not only aimed to
improve policing of their mutual frontier, but also signaled a sea
change in Pakistan’s foreign policy. Discussions centered on the
need to control al-Qaeda and Taliban passage into Pakistan. The
reported killing by Afghan security forces of twelve Pakistanis and
one Kyrgyz national, all affiliated with al-Qaeda, illustrated the
more determined efforts on both sides. Pakistan, noted General
Quadir, had entered into a new era of relations with Afghanistan,
and Islamabad was now in full support of the Hamid Karzai
government. Pakistan intended a close relationship with the
Afghan authorities. A start was with the Pakistan-proposed
Chaman–Kandahar road to promote commerce. The meeting
ended with both delegations committing themselves to the war on
terrorism and announcing their respective governments’ intentions
to sign two international conventions on combating terrorism.

Islamabad established a Special Investigation Group (SIG) in its
Federal Investigation Agency for the exclusive purpose of counter-
ing terrorism and sectarian violence. The SIG not only limited the
role of the ISI, but was expected to coordinate the activities of all
other law enforcement agencies. Its agents would focus efforts on
the identification and location of the “most wanted” terrorist
groups and individuals. Agents were to be empowered to arrest
and prosecute terrorists and the new agency would help to close
the lacunas arising out of the division of responsibilities between
different enforcement and intelligence organizations. An Economic
Crime Wing was to investigate money laundering between banks
and offshore accounts, and would be especially trained to deal
with extralegal Islamic transactions such as hundi and hawala.
Another organ of the SIG aimed to control the entry into and exit
from the country of suspected and known terrorists. A cyber-crime
wing was also contemplated. A sign of a more serious attitude
toward terrorism, the announcement also revealed the growing
sophistication of the government in confronting the violence as
well as the evolution of greater Pakistani–American cooperation.

Anti-terrorist organizations were late in forming, however, and
the criminals and anarchists retained the initiative. On August 9



352 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

a grenade attack on a chapel at the Christian Hospital in Taxila,
near Islamabad, killed four people, including three nurses and a
paramedic. Many more were wounded. The assailants, later
identified as connected to the outlawed Lashkar-i-Jhangvi and
Jayash-i-Mohammad, threw grenades at people departing from a
church service. It was not known if the attack was related to a
band of thirty Buddhists from Japan, Central Asia, and Russia
who were in Pakistan to engage in a cross-country “peace march”
aimed, they said, at ridding the world of nuclear weapons.
Nevertheless, the Musharraf government believed the attack was
another example of terrorist resolve, and of their shift in tactics to
softer targets. Such attacks on vulnerable sites, well outside the
urban centers, represented a low-cost effort to damage Pakistan’s
international profile and hence further undermine the country’s
economy and political system. Moreover, there was reason to
conclude that the earlier attack at the Murree church and this one
in Taxila were connected. In the course of their investigation the
authorities identified the formation of a new terrorist cell
composed almost exclusively of suicide squads. This unit, the
Lashkar-i-Omar, was said to have direct links with al-Qaeda, and
more assaults on the innocent were expected.

Maulana Fazlur Rahman, leader of the Jamiat-i-Ulema-i-Islam,
used the occasion of Pakistan’s fifty-fifth independence day
celebrations to declare that he could never support Musharraf’s
war on terrorism or his association with the United States. The
purpose of his party’s participation in the October elections, he
said, was to win sufficient seats in the national parliament to begin
the process of transforming Pakistan into a “sovereign Islamic
State.” Noting that his struggle with Musharraf was over ideology,
the Maulana said he and the other members of the Muttahida
Majlis-i-Amal would not rest until Pakistan became the true
spiritual state that its founders sought to create. Distinguishing the
Amal from the Taliban, he declared the latter was a response to
the anarchy of Afghanistan and had no relevance to Pakistan.
Pakistan was an established state with its own character. Its
people, he indicated, dreamed of living in an ideal Muslim
community, not a secular state, and his movement aimed to realize
that objective. By innuendo and declaration, therefore, the
Islamists claimed to be the true representatives of the Pakistani



Defining the Future 353

ethos and said that it was incumbent on them to end the secularist
usurpation of power. As much as Musharraf attempted to build
bridges between himself and the Islamists, it was obvious the
hard-core elements never contemplated giving him their support.
According to the Islamists, because Musharraf had allied himself
to the United States and made war on the latest Muslim
superheroes, namely bin Laden and Mullah Omar, there could
be no peace.

The immediate answer to Musharraf’s dilemma, therefore, was
building bridges not with the “true believers,” but rather with
those traditional politicians that his regulations, edicts, ordi-
nances, and decrees had so completely hamstrung. Jihadi militants
had demonstrated their capacity to express themselves by killing
and maiming the innocent. With hardly two months remaining till
the parliamentary elections, the time seemed to call for the
revitalizing of more sophisticated competitive politics. The people
of Pakistan had consistently supported the more secular politicians
over their fundamentalist rivals. If Musharraf was serious about
the development of democracy in Pakistan, it was time to formally
acknowledge the army’s failed policy in Afghanistan and the
futility of sustaining the Kashmir dispute with India. Neither
situation was winnable. Both had played into the hands of the
militants, had drained the country of its limited resources, and had
made a mockery of the pursuit of modern government. Moreover,
Pakistan was a nuclear power and it was time for the country to
demonstrate the maturity and responsibility that comes with the
possession of such awesome power.

Although it had taken the horrendous events of September 11,
2001 to engage the Americans, they were now deeply committed
in Central and South Asia. Pakistan’s military leaders had been
forced by the same events to choose between continuing to pursue
a failed course, and thus completely identifying themselves with
the jihadis and al-Qaeda, and reversing positions taken many
years earlier. The United States did not declare “formal” war on
terrorism until after the devastating assault on its territory on
September 11, 2001. Its subsequent assault on Afghanistan was
also a response to the Taliban’s harboring of the forces of Osama
bin Laden, the perpetrators of the attack on American soil.
Washington could not ignore the calamity of September 11, but its



354 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

action in Afghanistan was measured and restrained. Al-Qaeda’s
admission of guilt for the 9/11 attack did not place the United
States at war with Islam, although that was the intention of those
who perpetrated the attack. When the Islamist organizations
called this tragedy a fabrication by Washington to impose its writ
in vital Muslim territory, they ignored reality. When the
Americans abandoned the region after the end of the Soviet
misadventure in Afghanistan, they had no intention of returning.
Moreover, Musharraf’s overthrow of the Sharif government was
an internal affair and it was only because of the United States’ long
relationship with Pakistan that Washington initially registered its
support for the elected Muslim League government.

But Pakistan has always been the master of its own destiny. The
decision to abandon the Taliban and join the world was calculated
to make the best of a miserable situation. It is strange that these
tragic events and the reaction to them should provide Pakistan
with an opportunity to reclaim its vision of becoming a secular
and democratic nation. It seems that nothing less than the
upheaval caused by the airliners slamming into the World Trade
Center and the Pentagon could have moved Musharraf to rein in
those bent on terrible deeds. Musharraf must now rethink the
course of Pakistan’s future. If he truly wants to reconstruct
Pakistan, then he has no choice but to invite the free and open play
of all the politicians. They are, after all, Pakistan’s politicians,
nurtured in the ambience of a country with considerable promise
but too often ill-informed as to their true roles. If the Islamists are
to be tolerated in the Pakistan of the future, then certainly this is
no time to deny a voice and a place to all those wishing to take
part in Pakistani politics. The country has endured much that is
ignoble. It is time to accept the failures along with the frailties and
to nurture a generation of leaders unencumbered by blind
doctrines. A new generation waits off stage in the wings of
obscurity. That generation wishes to see the Pakistan of the
twenty-first century realize its potential for greatness, not only as a
Muslim nation but as a country that represents the better instincts
of humanity.

Benazir and Sharif are to be welcomed back to their country.
Whatever their offenses, this is not only a moment for clemency,
but a time to learn what the politicians are prepared to offer in



Defining the Future 355

return for renewed popular support. Pakistan has to begin
somewhere. The resurrecting of the political process cannot start
with a prohibition on the main contenders for political office. The
process must be allowed to find its own level; it cannot be stifled
even before it begins. Let the parties rebuild and restore their
credibility. It is a time not for diktat but rather for diverse views
and public discourse. Musharraf will need the politicians and the
Majlis-i-Shura to validate the country’s quest for true democracy.
It is they who hold the only possible answer to those who promote
hate and violence. Only a genuine experiment in modern living
can expose the militants for what they are, not the bearers but the
enemies of Islam. Musharraf is secure in his multiple offices and he
would yield nothing in allowing the politicians to enter the fray.
Moreover, the General needs the voices of those who find Islamist
argument one-dimensional and hence ill-suited to Pakistan.
Pakistanis can retrieve their religion from those who hold it
hostage to obscurant and discursive argument. Islam is not in
danger, in Pakistan or elsewhere, and it is a time to represent
Muslim concerns and objectives in contexts that center on
reconstruction and positive thinking. Sectarianism and terrorism
are demonic, not Islamic, and strategies to combat them require
the input of the best and the brightest.

Musharraf’s success as a leader will depend on his capacity to
transform vision into reality. His greatest challenge lies in leading
his nation away from the dangers of its collective and self-imposed
“Catch 22.” The parliamentary elections demonstrated that
Islamist and conventional party platforms are totally at odds.
The former emphasized the theocratic state whereas the latter
continued to stress contemporary democracy. Although neither of
the two forces could expect a perfect application of its ideas, the
choice between the two was made apparent by the events that
brought the Taliban to power in Afghanistan. The short-lived rule
of the Taliban provided Pakistanis with the opportunity to see
what their future would be under clerical rule. Pakistanis have also
experienced representations of secular democracy; although
flawed and primitive, these nevertheless have revealed what needs
to be done and undone. In the democratic tradition at least it is
possible to try again. Musharraf’s reforms may be aimed at
respecting all shades of political opinion, but the General cannot



356 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

be faulted for his hesitation and desire to harmonize the rhetorical
with the substantive. The integration of the military into Pakistani
governance may resemble politics in Egypt and Indonesia to some
observers, but it would be remiss for those wanting to see the
flowering of democracy in Pakistan not to acknowledge the failure
of previous elected governments.

Pakistan is neither Egypt nor Indonesia and the comparisons are
of questionable value. Pakistan, despite its sorry record, still has
the possibility of building a worthwhile future. Pakistani generals
have shown themselves to have feet of clay; their mistakes of
judgment have caused monumental harm. But this does not
exonerate the politicians, who have yet to demonstrate that their
belief in Pakistan is greater than their pursuit of self-interest.
Pakistan is not in search of a savior. Pakistanis rejected Ayub and
Bhutto, and they had no reason to feel endeared to Benazir or
Sharif. Nor is Musharraf a gift from on high to the Pakistani
nation. Leaders, in Pakistan as elsewhere, are fallible people, often
assuming burdens too heavy to carry. But life goes on. Musharraf
has offered Pakistanis a glimpse of their future. In the final
analysis, however, it is the Pakistani nation that must select the
path it is to tread. The nation stands at the crosscurrent of history.
A choice has to be made not only on the question of more or less
freedom, but also on the primordial question of life or death.

Electronic sources and writers consulted for chapters 10 and 11

http://www.hgmp.mrc.ac.uk/~npanjwan/PAKnewslist.html
http://bambi.acc.ncuu.edu/~nkhan/news.html
http://www.angelfire.com/nm/gta2hh/news.htm
http://frontierpost.com.pk
http://www.msnbc.com/news
http://www.phonewallas.com/indo-pak_papers.htm
http://www.dawn-usa.com/pakistan.shtml
http://faridi.net/news
http://www.dawn.com
Shafiq Ahmad, Aftab Ahmed, Hasan Akhtar, Zulfikar Ali, Rafaqat
Ali, Ayaz Amir, Khalid Mahmud Arif, Raja Asghar, Maqbool
Ahmad Bhatty, Shahid Javed Burki, Ardeshir Cowasjee, Masood
Haider, Ihtashamul Haq, Faraz Hashmi, Ahmad Hassan, Khalid



Defining the Future 357

Hasan, Raza Hassan, Irfan Hussain, Anwar Iqbal, Zafar Iqbal,
Qazi Muhammad Jamil, Irshad Abdul Kadir, M. Ismail Khan,
Sayeed Hasan Khan, Shujaat Ali Khan, Mahmood Khattak, Omar
Kureishi, Iffat Malik, Iftikhar H. Malik, Nasir Malik, Hamid Mir,
Ashraf Mumtaz, Jamaluddin Naqvi, Jawed Naqvi, Kuldip Nayar,
Hafizur Rahman, Arman Sabir, Shamim Shamsi, Ayesha Siddiqa-
Agha, Tahir Siddiqui, M. Arshad Sharif, Anis Shivani, Rahmatullah
Soomro, Jafar Wafa, Mohammad Waseem, Haider Zaman.



358 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History



12
STILL ANOTHER CROSSROADS

General Musharraf’s desires to stabilize the country and to reopen
the democratic process had earlier proved to be incompatible
objectives. Pakistan had had repeated difficulties hitching the
election horse to the democratic wagon. Pakistan’s first national
election in 1970 resulted in civil war. Its second produced the army
coup that not only dismissed the Prime Minister but led to his
trial, conviction, and hanging. Subsequent elections produced
civilian governments only to have them short-circuited by army
intervention, the Musharraf takeover in October 1999 being only
the most recent in a long series of extra-constitutional military
actions. In October 2002, Pakistanis went to the polls again,
ostensibly with the restoration of democracy their objective, but
with a degree of cynicism conditioned by so much past history.

Musharraf and a large portion of the Pakistani public were at
odds on the military putsch, the war on terrorism, the Legal
Framework Order reforms, and the future of the political
process. All these elements intertwined during an electoral
campaign that was anchored more in coping with religious
violence than in the nation’s economic development. Musharraf
had demonstrated his distrust of the prevailing political process
by making himself President, by ordering a referendum that
granted him another five-year term, and by insisting on the
prerogative to dismiss a government that failed to meet his test of

359



360 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

national integrity. Nevertheless, his repeated statements about
Pakistan’s future as a viable democracy compelled him to press
for a new round of elections. Although denying any intention of
shaping political outcomes, Musharraf authorized a plan that
was aimed at providing him with a mandate to control the
political process, and thus with the capacity to influence the
organization of the next civilian government. But like Yahya,
who believed the 1970 election campaign would turn in his favor,
Musharraf miscalculated the consequences of holding an election
in the disturbed conditions wrought by the events of September 11,
2001.

The American intrusion in Pakistan and Afghanistan, Washing-
ton’s role in destroying the Taliban government of Mullah Omar,
and its sustained attack on Taliban and al-Qaeda remnants in both
countries had embittered more than just Pakistan’s fundamentalist
orders. A wide array of political and professional organizations
denounced the American action. Their anger only added to the
rage exhibited by the Islamists and their jihadi adherents. There
was considerable sympathy, and in many cases practical support,
for the terrorists associated with Emir Omar and bin Laden,
especially in the frontier area where the heaviest fighting
continued.

The aim of removing United States forces from the region,
therefore, was sufficient reason for the otherwise rival Islamist
political organizations to create a united front. Six of Pakistan’s
principal fundamentalist parties agreed to create the Muttahida
Majlis-i-Amal (MMA), and this coalition characterized their
campaign with anti-American slogans. But the heaviest criticism
was reserved for Musharraf, for his temerity in submitting to
Washington’s demands for bases and cooperation. Musharraf’s
long-standing unpopularity in the frontier region, and indeed his
mohajir status, exacerbated the distaste for his actions. Despite
his long and faithful service with the Pakistan army, Musharraf’s
refugee credentials were never more glaring than when he accepted
and aided the American decision to dismantle the Taliban Islamic
state. Musharraf’s pronounced secular behavior, according to the
fundamentalists and their jihadi faithful, was blasphemous; it was
their objective to destroy the General and reverse the course his
policies had set in train.



Still Another Crossroads 361

Curiously, however, although Musharraf was the Islamists’ bête
noire, he was also their savior in the election campaign. Although
they rejected the secular state and its democratic processes, the
Islamists were ready and willing to play a game that broadened and
legitimated their program and gave them an unprecedented
opportunity to achieve formal political power, a goal never before
within their reach. Musharraf’s policies had hollowed out the more
secular political parties. By denying a direct role to Benazir and
Sharif, he had prevented the country’s principal political parties
from mounting an effective campaign. Moreover, Musharraf had
caused the split in the once dominant Muslim League and seemed
to identify with one of its factions. He also caused the splintering of
the Pakistan People’s Party, especially on the frontier, where a
Sherpao group had found it impossible to follow the old party line.
Musharraf’s faction was known as the “Pakistan Muslim League
(PML) (Q),” which the opposition and members of the literati
quickly dubbed the “King’s Party.” However, all the political
parties had been reduced to rump status by the military
government’s determination to prevent any threat to its authority,
and it was assumed the PML (Q) would gather more votes than
any of the other organizations contesting the elections.

Even Musharraf had not counted on the religious parties
coalescing. He did not believe their power would carry beyond a
benign status in the frontier provinces. Musharraf had not
targeted the Islamists as he had the conventional politicians. Still
appealing to spiritual sentiments, Musharraf continued to believe
his reputation as a devout Muslim would sustain his relationship
with the clerics. But he had underestimated the depth of hatred
caused by his association with the United States, his strict law and
order methods, and his attempt to reform the country’s religious
schools. Seen as determined to stifle religious expression in return
for American assistance, the General had made himself anathema
to the clerics and their disciples. Musharraf simply could not have
it both ways. He could not pretend to speak for religious Muslims
and at the same time join with the United States in what the
zealots argued was a direct assault on the Islamic world. The
Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal therefore was the Islamists’ answer to
the challenge represented by what many in Pakistan had come to
see as an alien intrusion into their lives.



362 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

In spite of the passionate character of the campaign, the election
was conducted as originally scheduled. The total vote cast on
October 10 was reported to be higher than in the previous two
elections, won by Benazir and Sharif respectively. A high voter
turnout in the rural areas was especially surprising and revealed
the organizational ability of the politicians at the grassroots.
Nevertheless, of approximately seventy million registered voters,
only about thirty million actually cast ballots, a figure the
government described as forty-one percent of the electorate. A
low urban turnout was attributed to voter apathy and the
prevailing view among city dwellers that the election results were
of little consequence given the army’s overriding dominance.
The PML (Q) secured the favor of 7.33 million voters and won
118 seats in the new national parliament of 342 seats. This was
not enough to dominate the assembly, or form a government. The
election results in fact denied any party the right to declare victory.
Benazir’s People’s Party organization won the next highest number
of seats, eighty-one, and in fact had garnered the greatest number
of votes, but it was the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal that caused the
biggest stir.

The six-party Islamist coalition not only established itself as the
maker or breaker of national coalitions, but had all but eliminated
the more established secular parties in the frontier states. The
MMA had placed itself in position to name a new Prime Minister
if it could form a coalition with other major winners. Perhaps even
more significant, the fundamentalists held the advantage in
forming future provincial governments in the North West Frontier
Province and Balochistan. Energized by their success and finding
themselves wooed by the PML (Q) and all the other parties, the
MMA sought to reduce Musharraf’s dictatorship to an adminis-
tration with neither legitimacy nor power.

In the weeks after the elections none of the major organizations
indicated an interest in propping up Musharraf’s government.
Joining forces with the “King’s Party” was declared tantamount to
pulling Musharraf’s chestnuts from the fire of defeat. Nevertheless
the PML (Q) refused to become a rubber stamp for the President
and it successfully resisted his attempt to select a Prime Minister.
But even this display of independence did not permit the party to
advance the process of forging a coalition government. Therefore



Still Another Crossroads 363

the convening of the new parliament on November 1 was
postponed. Rescheduled for November 5, the date was put off
till November 8 and then November 15. Finally, the government
insisted the parliament would be convened on November 16.

On November 16, 2002 General-President Pervez Musharraf
took the oath of office under the newly amended 1973
constitution in a ceremony in the Aiwan-i-Sadar witnessed by
ministers, ambassadors, high military officials, and his wife and
mother. Departing from the tradition that the President after being
elected by members of parliament and Senate took the oath of
office in front of the National Assembly, this more regal oath-
taking was another demonstration that Musharraf had separated
himself from the legislative body and answered to a different
constituency. While this event was occurring the National
Assembly was convening and the newly elected parliamentarians
were sworn in by the former speaker. Although the legislators
insisted on following the format laid out in the original 1973
constitution, the speaker convinced them that the oath in the
Musharraf-amended constitution was exactly the same as that in
the older document. The convening and the signing ceremony
completed, the parliament was adjourned and scheduled to meet
again on November 19 to elect a new speaker and deputy speaker.
Thus after more than a month of political maneuvering, with the
new government yet to be formed, the politicians were now in
place and ready to test the revised political system that President
Musharraf had imposed upon them.

On schedule, the parliament reconvened to elect the speaker and
deputy speaker and both offices were won by members of the
Pakistan Muslim League (Q). Chaudhry Amir Hussain, a former
Law Minister in the government of Nawaz Sharif, was elected
speaker by a narrow margin. The PML (Q) also won the deputy
speaker seat. The runners-up in both instances were the nominees
from Benazir’s Pakistan People’s Party and the Muttahida Majlis-i-
Amal. On November 21 the parliament convened to elect a new
head of government and selected Mir Zafrullah Khan Jamali to be
the Prime Minister. Jamali, also a PML (Q) leader, had won 172 of
329 votes cast in the 342-seat parliament. His nearest rival was the
nominee of the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal, who won eighty-six
votes. The PPP candidate received seventy votes and along with



364 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

the MMA candidate had to be content with a role in the
opposition. In a speech to the nation Musharraf declared he had
returned the management of government to civilian hands and
that he expected the new government to learn the lessons that had
caused the army to terminate previously elected administrations.
Though informed opinion had anticipated a greater and more
immediate Musharraf victory, there was no denying that the
General had kept his word to reopen the democratic process.

Further confirmation of Musharraf’s desire to improve his
credentials as a democratic leader was the holding of elections to
the Senate, the upper house of the parliament. The elections were
held in two phases in late February 2003, when the one-hundred-
seat body also came under the influence of the Pakistan Muslim
League (Q) with a slim majority fifty-three seats. The two
opposition coalitions, one the fifteen-party Alliance for the
Restoration of Democracy led by the Pakistan People’s Party
Parliamentarians, and the other the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal
divided most of the remaining Senate seats. PML (Q) dominance
was nevertheless assured when these main opposition coalitions,
the ARD/PPP and the MMA, failed to agree on matters of policy,
particularly foreign policy and Musharraf’s sustained ties to the
U.S.-led international coalition against global terrorism.

Election Results of October 10, 2002

Party Seats

Pakistan Muslim League (Q) 118
Pakistan People’s Party 81
Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal 60
Pakistan Muslim League (N) 19
Muttahida Qaumi Movement 17
National Alliance 16
Pakistan Muslim League (F) 5
Pakistan Muslim League (J) 3
Pakistan People’s Party (Sherpao) 2
Balochistan National Party 1
Jamhoori Watan Party 1
Pakistan Awami Tehreek 1
Pakistan Muslim League (Z) 1



Still Another Crossroads 365

Pakistan Tehreek-I-Insaf 1
Muhajir Qaumi Movement Pakistan 1
Independents (including twelve from the Frontier Area 14

Tribal Agency)
Pending 1
Total 342

Source: Associated Press Pakistan, November 3, 2002

Immediate and long-term consequences

Although the MMA leaders publicized their dissatisfaction that
Musharraf had not called the parliament into session earlier, and
exploited the delay by threatening dire consequences if the
Assembly did not meet, the Islamists had really viewed the situation
as a win–win opportunity. The deeper the impasse the more time the
MMA enjoyed to pursue its goals. Moreover, the fundamentalists
knew full well that their cause was also that of a huge section of
the body politic. The army had too often imposed its will on the
public and a broad spectrum of Pakistani society was eager for a
return to civilian rule despite their memories of the politicians’
many past failures. Thus the MMA was destined to gain stature
and credibility as well as legitimacy by articulating the sentiments
of Pakistanis, few of whom were otherwise enamored with
fundamentalist programs and policies. The key issue according to
Maulana Fazlur Rahman, the MMA’s nominee for Prime Minister,
was the Legal Framework Order and Article 58(2)(b) of the
constitution, which conferred upon the President the discretion
to dismiss a government he did not agree with. The MMA also
denounced Musharraf’s National Security Council, which oversaw
the operations of the government, and the method Musharraf had
used to extend his presidency an additional five years. The MMA
continually cited the supremacy of the parliament in all matters of
government and repeatedly demanded Musharraf’s resignation
from his high army post if he expected to remain President. The
two positions, they argued, were incompatible with democratic
governance.

Musharraf felt the pressure of other members of the political
fraternity, but none was more forceful than the MMA. Benazir’s
and Sharif’s long-distance criticism of the Musharraf regime could



366 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

not register the same impact on Pakistani society. Operating from
an inside position and riding a tide of popular dissatisfaction with
the administration, the MMA knew Musharraf would not cast
aside his uniform for a full-time position as President given the
ease with which Presidents had been forced to retire when
confronted by military power. Though Musharraf spoke of the
popular yearning for democracy and claimed to have made it his
principal objective, it was obvious he could not relinquish control
over the levers of power. Pakistan remained unprepared for
democratic experience, and it would take more than an election to
convince the men in uniform that the country’s politicians could
manage the complex affairs of state and confront the war on
terrorism at the same time.

Nonetheless, in this sixth decade since independence the least
likely segments of Pakistani society had made themselves the
torchbearers of democracy. First the army, the epitome of
centralized authority, demanding total obedience to the chain of
command, had addressed the need for another form of tutored
democracy. And now the Islamists, the self-proclaimed religious
conscience of the nation, whose ethos embodied complete
submission to God’s vicegerent on earth, Emir Omar, the self-
declared Khalifah of the Islamic state, also insisted their objective
was the realization of democracy. That these contrary forces had
become the supreme claimants to Pakistan’s democratic heritage
spoke volumes for the shambles that had been made of the
political process. Musharraf, the spokesman of the army, called
for a democracy he had never experienced, while the MMA, the
counterfoil of military governance, claimed the high ground not
only by flaunting its spirituality, but by arguing its interposition
between the army and the public’s desired democratic goals. That
these should be the two forces to articulate Pakistan’s quest for
popular self government in the twenty-first century revealed much
about a nation still in search of a raison d’être.

Washington had always been more comfortable with Pakistani
generals than politicians, although among the latter Benazir
Bhutto had challenged the conventional wisdom and had forged
sentimental associations with American public opinion. But given
the war on terrorism in Pakistan and Afghanistan, it was not
extraordinary that the United States should prefer Musharraf to



Still Another Crossroads 367

lead Pakistan. So the United States therefore was again singled out
as the major obstacle to Pakistani democracy. This remained a
particular argument of the Pakistani intelligentsia in spite of the
fact that none of them had a good word for any of the politicians.
“Greed,” “corruption,” “superego” were words applied to all the
politicians, especially those in positions of power. Lacking
confidence in past leaders, no one was ready to speak a kind
word for the current crop of opportunists and self-seekers.
Moreover, the politicians never had kind words for one another;
if the public displayed their lack of confidence in their political
leaders, it was only an echo of how the seekers of political office
perceived one another. In more than five decades of uninterrupted
political chaos there was no one past or present to measure up to
the stature of the Quaid-i-Azam.

This was the army’s conclusion in the days of Ayub Khan and
nothing had happened since then to shift opinion in a more
positive direction. With the intensification of the rivalry with
India, especially over Kashmir, but in the production of nuclear
weapons as well, it was the Pakistan army that was called to meet
New Delhi’s challenge. It was the army that developed and held
control over Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal. It was the army that
flashed the nuclear deterrent in the 2002 face-off with the Indian
army along the Pakistan–India frontier. And it was Musharraf
who trumpeted the success of the army’s strategy when New
Delhi, after almost ten tense months, finally announced its
decision to withdraw thousands of its frontline troops. From
Islamabad’s position, the nuclear deterrent worked even if the
conflict over Kashmir continued to simmer. For all its passion, the
Kashmir dispute remained a subject for rational inquiry, but how
did the nuclear question factor into the war on terrorism? The
sustained confrontation over Kashmir prompted world leaders to
take another look at the problem and even to offer mediation.
World leaders viewed with trepidation the connection between
Pakistan’s nuclear deterrent and the domestic conditions within the
Muslim nation that had nurtured the Taliban and al-Qaeda.
Pakistan’s central role in the war on terrorism and its position
among the world’s nuclear powers meant the country would never
again find itself on the margins of global events. The March 2003
capture in Rawalpindi by a joint task force of Pakistani and



368 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

American counter-terrorism agents of al-Qaeda’s reputed central
architect for the September 11 event was still another reminder of
the close operations between the Musharraf government and U.S.
agencies. (Note too, in April 2003, Washington’s decision to write
off $1 billion in Pakistani debt.) The arrest of Khalid Shaikh
Mohammad and a number of his colleagues was not only heralded
as an important event in the war on terrorism, but also raised
anew concerns that a number of Pakistan’s Islamist leaders
continued to aid and abet the operations of the Taliban and
Osama bin Laden. Moreover, the pattern of raids on terrorist
hideaways and the apprehension of significant terrorist leaders in
Pakistan reinforced the view held by a growing number of political
personalities, in and outside the Pakistan government, that the
haboring of wanted terrorists in the homes of important Pakistanis
was an assault on the integrity of the nation. Shortly after Khalid
Shaikh Mohammad’s arrest rumor circulated of direct links
between al-Qaeda and Jamaat-i-Islami, the central organization
in the Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal.

If the United States preferred Musharraf to Pakistan’s politicians,
it was because Pakistan had become the contemporary pivot of
history: if the threat posed by unbridled political activism in the
name of religion were not contained, more than Pakistan’s
democratic objectives would be at risk. Pakistan had already
come too close to being Talibanized. It was no longer possible to
ignore the possibility that an indigenous political movement with
an obscurant agenda could gain control of the government and in
the course of events link up with an ambitious army officer of
similar persuasion. Observed from that position, the war on
terrorism takes on even more complex dimensions.

To ward off a more critical phase in Pakistan’s history,
sophisticated Pakistanis have by and large risen to the present-
day challenge and have demonstrated genuine resistance to the
forces of chaos. Many Pakistanis, not just Musharraf, have
generally acknowledged that the times will not permit the nation
to separate itself from the American presence any more than it can
divorce itself from the specter of the Taliban or al-Qaeda. In the
prevailing conditions and for the foreseeable future, Pakistani
society will be compelled to choose between an army-dominated
but secular political system, or an army-dominated government



Still Another Crossroads 369

guided by theocratic ruminations. Neither can satisfy Pakistan’s
attentive, worldly and educated public, let alone their desire for a
functioning democracy. But other alternatives are not now in the
stars, or in Pakistan’s future. Hardly six decades after indepen-
dence, Pakistan stands at a crossroad. But unlike earlier crises, the
road it now chooses to follow is not only critical to its role as a
modern Muslim nation, but inevitably must impact the extended
world of nation-states.






INDEX

Abdullah, Farooq 350 Soviet withdrawal 201, 202, 301
Achakzai, A.S. 77 UN-mediated settlement 193, 200
Afghanistan Aga Khan, the 11, 12

Bhutto (Z.A.), friendly relations with Ahmad, Aziz 106
145 Ahmad, Hafiz Saeed 319

catalyst for interlocking of the Ahmed, Qazi Hussain 270–71, 314
faithful 262, 264 Ahmediyya, opposed as heretics 58–60

Communist rule, Islamist struggle al-Huq, Mohammad Zia, appointed as
against 178–79, 208–9 leader of Pakistan army 153–54

monarchy, abolition of 145, 175 al-Hussani, Allama Arif 199
Najibullah government 208–9, 213, al-Qaeda ix

281 American incursions in pursuit of
Pakistan’s continuing strategic role 318

in 317 domestic violence, complicity in 304
Peshawar Accord, and formation of fertile ground for and in Pakistan

ruling council 225–26 272, 290–91, 302–3
Republic, creation of under Sardar formation as ‘base’ for war with

Daud 145, 175 Americans 291
see also Taliban movement harboring of members of 341–42,

Afghanistan War 368
American assistance 181–82, ISI/al-Qaeda/Taliban links ix–x, 246,

192–93 264, 271, 284, 285–86,
ISI, role of 177–78, 180–81, 196–97, 290–91, 303–4

208–9, 213–14, 223–26, Kashmir, al-Qaeda supported groups
279–80, 288, 289–90, 300, in 292
301–2 Northern Alliance leader,

Islamization of 230–31, 247–48, assassination of 307
262, 264 terrorist activities in Pakistan

Pakistan–Washington use of Islam as 337–39, 341–42, 351, 368
weapon 278–79 US counter-terrorism 286, 305,

refugees, assistance with 176, 177 307–8, 331–32
Soviet invasion 175–76, 179–80, see also bin Laden, Osama; Taliban

278–79 movement

371



372 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

al-Alami, Harkatul Mujahiddin 343 national reconstruction, vision for
Alexander, A.V. 33 88–89, 90
Ali, Chaudhri Mohammad 71–72, 75 new capitals, building of 89
Ali, Rehmet 24 refugee problem 83
All-India Muslim League 48–49 sectarian expression, opposition
All-India Muslim Students Federation 21 to 83
Amin, Hafizullah 178–79 ‘Operation Gibralter’, failure of 107
ASEAN (Association of South East ‘Operation Grand Slam’ disaster 107

Asian Nations) 349–50 political ambience, separation from
Ataturk, Mustfa Kemal 87–88 77–78
Attlee, Clement 32–33, 36 political process, reopening of 96
Awami League 76, 77, 78, 95, 117, 166 presidential constitution

demands of 117–18 promulgated by 96, 97
election victory not permitted to presidential elections 1964 97–98

form government following Rann of Kutch skirmish 104
119–23, 135, 299 Rawalpindi conspiracy 93, 95

Awami National Party (ANP) 211, 254, reluctant departure of 113–14
275–76 and shaping of ISI 279

Ayub Khan, General Soviet Union, and India-Pakistan
background 92–93 peace talks (Tashkent) 108–9
Combined Opposition Party (COP), staff and confidants, careful choice

formation of 97–98 of 94–95
Conventionist Muslim League, Tashkent peace talks 108–9

formation of 97 US, alliance with 98–99, 104
‘Decade of Development’, see also Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali

opposition to 112 Azad, Maulana Kalam 33, 42
first indigenous leader of the army

70–71, 93 Baghdad Pact 76
foreign policy, COP dissatisfaction Baig, General Mirza Aslam 219, 222

with 98–99 appointed COAS 208
India-Pakistan tensions, attempts to no-holds-barred proposal, rejected

reduce 94 by Bhutto (B.) 215–16
India’s feebleness, failure to take sides with Bhutto (B.) 212–14

advantage of 103 Balochistan 14–15, 115, 141–42, 150
Kashmir dispute 99–102, 105, 107 Bangladesh see East Pakistan civil war
martial law, Kalat secession as trip- Bengal

wire for 79–80 division of 4, 38–39, 45–50
Basic Democracies tiered system East Bengal provincial elections

81–83, 298 62–64
Civil service corruption, military attack on people of 122–23

elimination of 85–86 uprising in 120–23
civil service training institutions, see also East Pakistan civil war

establishment of 86 Bhashani, Maulana 77, 117, 118–19,
failed political experience, legacy 166

of 88 Bhave, Vinoba 27
family planning issues 87 Bhutto, Benazir
inherited problems, addressing arbitrary powers, use of 215

83–84 Asif Zardari (husband), influence on
labour abuses, addressing 86 policy 238
land reforms 84–85 democracy as goal of 211
legal, educational and medical economic assistance 237–38

system reforms 87 economic problems 213
Muslim Family Laws Ordinance exiled to England 191

87, 112 failed vote of no confidence in 214
Muslim League, as anachronism Farooq Leghari, government

88 dismissed by 241–42



Index 373

and General Baig 212–16 Balochistan ‘insurgency’, crushing of
Gulf coalition, support for 216 141–42, 150
hailed as leader of PPP 191 character of 149
Ishaq Khan Chief Martial Law Administrator,

asked by to form government and rebuilding of military
210–11 135–36

collusion with over poisoning of Commonwealth, cutting of ties with
General Asif 226–27 136–37

deposed by 216–17 divide and rule policy 140
ISI activities 213–14, 236, 239 East Bengal perception as of little
judiciary, manipulation of 236, 239, value 135

240 East Pakistan civil war, and
Karachi, renewed rioting in 237, opportunity to become

238–39 President 127–28
MQM, loss of support from 213, election (1977) and aftermath

214 civil unrest, and refusal of army
Murtaza Bhutto, feud with 233, 238, to act 157–59

240, 241 removal from power 158,
Nawaz Sharif, clash with 211–12, 159–60, 163–64

213–14, 222, 236–37 vote rigging, opposition claims of
placed in ‘protective custody’ 157–58

241–42 election campaign 1976, and policies
religious community, tirade against of personal survival 155–56

239–40 executive-dominant parliamentary
return to Pakistan 192 government 143–44
returned as Prime Minister 233 first National Elections, and
Salman Rushdie, support for 214–15 demands for new elections
selected leader of Awami (People’s) 119–20

Movement 192 first post-war government formed by
Sindh separist violence 213 133–34
Taliban, army sponsorship of 240 hanged by Zia 169
waning of PPP without 254–55 Islamic Summit Conference (1974)
woman in man’s (Muslim) world 138

214 Kashmir dispute
Zia, ardent critic of 190, 192 assigned to as Foreign Minister
Zia’s ‘Black Day’ 194 99–100, 102–3
see also PPP and exploitation of popular

Bhutto, Murtaza feeling 101
Asif Zardari accused of murdering ‘Operation Gibralter’ ISI

241, 242 operation, masterminding of
and Imran Khan, alliance between 105–6

240 rhetoric over 109
Bhutto, Shahnawaz, murder of 191 seizure of Kashmir, advocation of
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali 106–7

acclaimed ‘Quaid-i-Awam’ 134 one-party state, aim of 299–300
Afghanistan, friendly relations with Pakistan as ‘Islamic Republic’ 144

145 Palestinians, solidarity with 139
and ‘Agatarla Conspiracy’ 111 political influence, extent of 147
Ahmediyya, use as scapegoat political parties, removal of 140–41

149–50 reforms aimed to boost support
ambition to lead Pakistan 96 152–53
appointed to federal cabinet 95, 97 SEATO, severing of ties with 136
Awami League, denounced by 121 Shah of Iran, alliance with 154–55
Ayub Simla agreement, with India 137

nurtured by 95–96 Sindhi nationalist sentiment,
vote of no confidence in 114 exploitation of 139–40



374 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Tashkent peace talks, and decision to demand for British withdrawal
leave Ayub government 29–30
109–10 dominance of 17

United Democratic Front, formation Muslim League, cooperation with
and neutralizing of 143 4–5, 17

violence against opposition 150–51 nationalist organization 10
Zia, behavior villified by 168 Nehru appointed to run 18
see also Federal Security Force; PPP non-cooperation policy 6–7

bin Laden, Osama ix Pakhtunistan Movement, sympathy
call for extradition of 286 with 13, 14
defiant messenger of the new Islam partition, seen as ‘vivisection’ of

290–91 subcontinent 39
disowned by Saudis 313 and self-government movement 3
International Islamic Front for Jihad, Unionist Party, support for 13, 14

formation of 291 Council for Defense and National
Mullah Omar, public face of 291 Security (CDNS) 242–43,
Taliban, joining of 291 244–45
see also al-Qaeda; Taliban Cripps, Sir Stafford 27, 33

movement Cripps mission proposals 27–31
Bizenjo, Mir Ghaus Bakhsh Khan

142–42 Dal, Akali 38
Bogra, Mohammad Ali 61 Daud, Sardar Mohammed 144, 155,
Bose, Subas Chandra 27 175, 178, 223–24
British departure, consequences of Daultana, Mian Mumtaz 54, 59–60

rapid 68–69 Defence of India Ordinance (1939) 21
British Indian army 5, 10, 46 democracy
Bush, George W. 303 army, and reclamation of

bureaucracy 297–98
Cabinet Mission proposals colonial legacy 295–96

acceptance by Muslim League 35–36 and concept of sovereignty 205–6
opposed by Congress Party 35–36 and extremism 295–97
and problem of the Indian army 35 Islamists, objective of 366
reversal of and formation of Pakistani governance, influence of

‘caretaker government’ 36 US on 294–95
Union of India, plan for 34 politicians, and army as threat to

Central Treaty Organization (CENTO) democracy 298
79, 136 and separation of church and state

Chamberlain, Neville 20 276–78
Chundrigar, I.I. 36, 77 unity and diversity 207
Churchill, Winston 27 Zia’s Islamization program 300
CIA (Central Intelligence Agency see also Ishaq Khan, Ghulam; Sharif,

(USA)) 181–82 Nawaz
Clinton, Bill 235, 251, 270, 271, Deoband School of Islam 42, 43

283–86 Dostum, Abdul Rashid 224, 225, 245,
Clinton, Hilary 238 282, 315
Commonwealth, formation of 32 Dulles, John Foster 61
Congress Party

1937 elections victory 18 East Bengal
anti-war policy, and civil unrest Iskander Mirza sent to assume

21–22 dictatorial powers 64
authority transferred to 39 post-partition leadership of 48–50
Cabinet Mission proposals, East Pakistan civil war

opposition to 35–36 American indifference 125, 127
Cripps mission proposals, anti- Indian intervention, and creation of

secessionist position following independent Bangladesh
30–31 123–26



Index 375

and new resolve in Islamic faith 164, post-1937 election acrimony 20
166–67, 299 satyagraha (passive resistance)

Pakistan, humiliation and campaign 5–7, 18
dismemberment of 127, 130 tactics condemned by Jinnah 6, 9

and slaughter of Muslims by as worldwide phenomenon 9–10
Muslims 174 Gandhi, Rajiv 195–96, 220

see also Yahya Khan, General Aga Gauhar, Altaf 105, 111
Mohammad Ghaffar Khan, Abdul 13, 48, 77, 79,

Egyptian Brotherhood 177, 280, 289 142
election 2002 Gillani, Shaikh Mubarik Shah 328

American intrusion, denouncing of Gokhale, Gopal Krishna 6, 8
360 Government of India Act (1919) 7, 10

army, and recognition of need for Government of India Act (1935) 16–17,
democracy 366 18, 66, 88

coalition government, difficulty Government of India Amending Act
forming 362–63 (1939) 21

election results 364–65 Gracey, Sir Douglas 93
Islamists, objective of democracy Gul, Lieutenant-General Hamid

366 213–14, 311
low turnout for 362 Gulf War 216, 219–20
MMA (Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal), Gurmani, Mushtaque Ahmed 75

position of 360–61, 362,
365–66 Haq, Abdul 314

Pakistan Muslim League, position of Haroon, Sir Abdullah 25
361, 362–63 Hasan, Mubashir 145

Senate elections 364 Hekmatyar, Gulbadin 178, 179–81, 209,
speaker and deputy speaker, election 224, 225, 280, 282, 290, 312

of 363–64 Hitler, Adolf 20
war on terror, and nuclear question Hizb-i-Islami 179, 180–81, 209, 214,

367–68 224, 225, 280, 290, 312
Huq, Fazlul 24, 62–63, 64, 78–79

Federal Security Force (FSF) Hussain, Altaf 237, 275
crimes of linked to Bhutto (Z.A.) Hussain, Saddam 186, 216

167–68
formation and activities of 141, Iftikharuddin, Mian 77

146–47, 148, 149, 150–51, India Independence Act (1947) 39, 88
153, 157–59 Indian National Army (INA),

formation of 27, 28
Gandhi, Indira 124, 125–26, 137, 175, Indian National Congress see Congress

195 Party
Gandhi, Mahatma Inter-Services Intelligence see ISI

anti-coloniast popular movement 3 International Islamic Front for Jihad,
ascetic and mystic 18 formation by Osama bin
and Cabinet Mission 34 Laden 328
Caliphate Movement, prominent Iqbal, Mohammad 13–14, 21

role in 7–8 Iran, revolution in 176–77, 181, 201,
Congress Party, anti-war policy 278–79

21–22, 27 Iran, Shah of 138, 154–55, 176
Home Rule campaign 10 Iran-Iraq war 186–87, 193, 201, 230
industrial class, challenge to might ISAF (International Security Assistance

of 6 Force) 321
Jinnah sidelined by 3–6, 9–11, 16 Ishaq Khan, Ghulam
Muslim groups, support from 13 absolute power, legitimation of 206–7
Pakhtunistan Movement, sympathy challenge to powers of by Nawaz

with 13 226
popular movement, growth of 12–13 democracy 205–7



376 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Movement for the Restoration of Islamic legal code, implementation
Democracy 207 of (1988) 201–2

PPP/IJI divide 210 Islamic religion, as unifying factor
state of emergency, declaration of 208 169–70
sworn in as President 207–8 Islamic renaissance, influence of
Zia 175–77

gap filled by bureaucracy 207 Islamic state, objective of 164–65
Islamization program of 209–10 Islamist orders, not perceived as
vacuum left by 204–5 threat 164–65

see also Bhutto, Benazir Majlis-i-Shura , establishment of
ISI (Inter-Service Intelligence) 105 183–84

Afghan interim government, religious scholars, training of 186
involvement in 280–81 Shariat courts, creation of 184–86

Afghan National Commanders and unleashing of divisive forces
Shura strategy, rejection of 194–95
281–82 and use of religion as weapon 200

Afghanistan War, role in 177–78, utility of 288
180–81, 196–97, 208–9,
213–14, 223–26, 279–80, 288, Jalianwalabagh massacre 6
289–90, 300, 301–2 Jamaat-i-Islami 42, 76, 166, 167, 177,

airing of adventures of (Musharraf) 189, 270, 280, 313, 314
320 Jamiat-i-Islami 179

al-Qaeda and Bin Laden, no action Jamiat-i-Ulema-i-Hind, Delhi 42
taken over 286 Jamiat-ul-Ulema-i-Islam 141, 313

armed forces, divisions within 195 Jamiat-ul-Ulema-i-Pakistan 189, 313
authority of Zia, question of 205 Jan, Maulvi Agha 342
Ayub, and shaping of 279 Jayash-i-Mohammad 303, 304, 318,
condemned by PPP 343–44 319, 323, 329, 330, 352
conspiracies and alleged coup Jinnah, Fatima 98, 102

(Bhutto (B.)) 236, 239 Jinnah, Mohammad Ali
election (1977) and aftermath 157, ‘Ambassador of Unity’ 4

159 Bengali language question 50, 56
India, clandestine activities against British contribution, belief in need

196–97 for 8–9
ISI/al-Qaeda/Taliban links ix–x, 246, British war effort, call for support of

264, 271, 284, 285–86, 20–21, 22
290–91, 303–4 Cabinet Mission proposals 34, 36

Kashmir, clandestine activities in Calcutta All-Parties Conference 11
105–6, 256, 288, 299 Caliphate Movement, opposition to

Mullah Omar, complicity in escape 7–8
of 320–21 civil society, as foundation preceding

Northern Alliance’s Kabul full democracy 23–24
government, rejection of colonial government, cooperation
282–83 with 23–24

Pakistan/Iranian interests, conflict Communal Award, acceptance of
between 280–81 16–17

ubiquitous activities of 302 Congress Party, fear of 19
Zia’s plane, loss of 280 death of 51
see also Taliban movement federal scheme, rejection of 25

Islamabad, creation of 89 Gandhi (M.), sidelined by 3–6, 9–11,
Islamization program (Zia) 171–73 16

commitment to 182 Governor General of Pakistan 43,
and ideological war against 45–47, 51

(Western) secularism 200–202 Hindu-Muslim amity campaign 1–2,
Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA/ 6, 10, 11

IJI) 209–10 legacy of 50–58, 51–58



Index 377

liberal persuasion 1 Indian parliament, terrorist assault
literati, appeal to 3 on 318–19
Lucknow Pact (1916) 4–5 ISI clandestine activities 105–6, 256,
Moltilal Nehru Report 11 288, 299
Musharraf’s adoption of memory of Kashmir State Asssembly, suicide

325–26 bombing of 310
Muslim-Sikh conflict, resolution of Musharraf, involvement of 255–57,

16–17 266, 269–70, 306, 324
national unity, quest for 15 and perpetuation of Congress/
Nehru, underestimation of 18 Muslim League conflict 40–41
non-cooperation policy of Gandhi, quest for resolution of 230

opposition to 6–7 as religious expression 70, 287,
post-1937 election acrimony 20 298–99
provincial leaders, post-partition Siachen episode 195–96

power struggles of 47–50 Simla agreement 137
Quaid-i-Azam, acclaimed as 21, 42, Zia, invovlement of 173–74, 186

46 Kasuri, Ahmad Raza 145, 151, 169
recalled from England for leadership Kennedy, John F. 98

role 15–16 Khaliquzzaman, Chaudhri 31, 49
reserved strategy, failure of 3–4 Khan, Abdul Qayyum 48
Round Table Conference (1930), Khan, General Akbar 93, 95, 141

role in 11–12 Khan, General Mohammad Ayub see
rule of law, commitment to 8–9, 25 Ayub Khan, General
secular vision, unreality of 69–70 Khan, General Mohammad Yahya see
self-imposed exile in England 3, 11, Yahya Khan, General

12 Khan, General Tikka 125, 126, 142,
separate Muslim state, opposition to 143

13–15 Khan, Ghazanfar Ali 36
social coalescence 1–2 Khan, Imran 240
two-nation theory 8, 25–26 Khan, Liaquat Ali see Liaquat Ali
vilified by Muslim clerics (ulema) Khan, Nawabzada

42–43 Khan, Mairaj Mohammed 145, 146
Wavell plan, intransigence over Khan, Sikander Hyat 24

33–34 Khan, Sir Zafrullah 59
wife, death of 11 Khan, Wali 140, 143, 144, 150–51,
see also Muslim League 213, 276

Johnson, Lyndon 107 Khan Sahib, Dr. 78, 79
Junejo, Mohammad Khan 190, Khomeini, Ayatollah Ruhollah 176,

199–200 186–87, 215
Khuhro, Mohammad Ayub 48, 50

Kakar, General Waheed 226, 227, 239 Kissinger, Henry 115, 125
Karachi bus terminal bombing 215 Krishak Sramik Party 62
Karamat, General Jehangir 240,

249–50 Lashkar-i-Tayyaba 303, 318, 319, 329
Karmal, Babrak 179 Leghari, Farooq
Karzai, Abdul Ahad 290 appointed President 233–34, 238
Karzai, Hamid 343, 345 B. Bhutto government dismissed by
Kashmir dispute 241–42

and al-Qaeda supported groups 292 forced resignation of 246
and ASEAN attack on terrorism stabilization of army command and

349–50 control 240
Ayub, involvement of 99–102, 105, Liaquat Ali Khan, Nawabzada 15–16,

107 36, 92, 315–16
Bhutto (Z.A.), involvement of assassination of 54–55, 93

99–101, 102–3, 105–7, 109 ‘Cabinet of Talents’, formation of
as defining issue 131–32, 264 71–72



378 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Governor General’s office, Nazimuddin and cabinet dismissed
depoliticization of 55 by 61, 66, 71

Islamic goals of 53 politicians, suspicion of 58
Jinnah, successor to 50–51 ‘steel frame of colonial government’
limitation of powers as Prime 58

Minister 52 Moltilal Nehru Report 11
‘One Unit’ policy 71, 77 Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms 7
Second Constituent Assembly, Mookerjee, Shyama Prasad 30–31

formation of 71, 72–73 Morley-Minto Reforms (1909) 8, 78
Lucknow Pact (1916) 4–5 Mountbatten, Lord Louis 30, 37–39,

51
MacDonald, Ramsay 11 MQM (Mohajir Qaumi Movement,
Mahasabha 4, 29, 30–31 also Muttahida Qaumi
Mahmood, Masood 168 Movement) 140, 254, 275–76
Mahmood, Mufti 141 Mughal system 2, 14, 24
Mairaj Khalid caretaker government Mujaddedi, Sibghatullah 225

241–43 Musa, General Mohammad 103–7,
Mandal, Jogendarnath 36 105, 110
Masud, Ahmad Shah 178, 179, 181, Musharraf, General Pervez

224, 225, 245, 271, 282, 290, All Parties Conference (APC), and
307, 328 call for removal of 340

Maudoodi, Maulana Abdul Ala 42, 59, appointed COAS 251
143, 167, 177 army coup, justification for 268–69

Mazari, Mir Balkh Sher 227 Awami National Party (ANP), minor
Memon, Nisar 340 role of 276
Michel, Louis 307 background of 265–66
Mirza, Iskandar Chief Executive, title of 266–67

and Ayub 73–74, 80–81, 94 claimed accomplishments of 273–74
civil coup, plotting of 76–77 constitutional amendments,
first President 72–73 opposition to 345–48
Governor General 71–72 democracy, need to try again 355–56
Muslim League, alliance with 77–78 economic dislocation 272–73
nation-state, commitment to 73–74 Grand Democratic Alliance,
National Awami Party (NAP), formation of 268

formation of 76–77 India-Pakistan dialog, international
national unity, aim of 74–75 pressure for 342–43
Republican Party, formation of Islamists hatred of, and anti-US

75–76 feeling 340–41
separate versus joint electorates issue Islamist parties, support from 269,

78 270–71
sovereignty issue, and Muslim belief isolationism 271

74, 75 Jinnah, adoption of memory of
Suez crisis (1956) 76 325–26

MMA (Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal) Kashmir dispute 269–70, 324, 343
360–61, 362, 365–66 localized government, people’s

Moen Qureshi caretaker government preference for 274
nuclear program, attempts to curtail MQM, role of 275–76

232 National Security Council,
Prime Minister, appointment of 229 formation of 267, 335,
reforms ordered by 231–32 336–37, 345, 346–48

Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM), Nawaz Sharif
formation of 199, 211 charges against 267–68, 269

Mohammad, Khalid Shaikh 368 coup and removal of 255–57,
Mohammed, Ghulam 266, 275

democracy as unsuited to masses 58 nuclear weapons, tension with India
Governor General, selected as 55–56 over 327



Index 379

parliamentary government/Islamic Nehru, Moltilal 11, 18, 33–34, 36
state, conflicting models of Nehru, Pandit Jawaharlal 18
274–75 Nishtar, Sardar Abdur Rab 36, 76, 79

political parties, marginalization of Nixon, Richard 61, 115, 125, 127
344–46 Nizam-i-Mustapha, formation of 165,

politicians, need to welcome back 171–72
354–55 Nizam of Hyderabad 25

presidential powers, assumption of Noakhali atrocities 37
276 Noon, Malik Firoz Khan, government

prominent citizens, killings of 337 of 78–79, 94
referendum, and legal extension of North West Frontier Province 14–15,

authority 332–36 39, 45, 48, 115, 117
religious schools, reform of 322, Northern Alliance

348–49 assassination of leader of 307
see also terrorism, war on successful campaign of 314–15

Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 87, 202 Tehran, support from 251, 271
Muslim League nuclear program

aims of unrealizable 64–66 advancement of 197–98
authority transferred to (1947) 39 attempts to curtail 232
Cabinet Mission, interim India-Pakistan tension 151–52, 197,

government, formation of 36 327
call for self-governing Muslim nuclear capability, demonstration of

country 22–25 250–51
civil-military establishment control tension with India over 327

of 64–66 and war on terror 367–68
and Congress party cooperation 4–5
Cripps proposals, opposition to 29 Objectives Resolution (1949) 52–53,
Direct Action, call for 37, 38 74, 75
East Bengal provincial elections Omar, Mullah Mohammad 245, 286,

62–64 291, 320–21
election defeat (1937) 17–19 ‘One Unit’ policy 71, 77, 115, 116–17
Governor General, politicians’ move Ottoman Empire 7

against 64, 66, 71
infighting 47–50 Pak Commonwealth, call for 24
‘Islam in Danger’ theme 17, 19–20 Pakhtunistan Movement 13, 14, 43, 283
lack of leverage in northwestern Pakistan, invention of name 24

region 14 Pakistan Communist Party 111
opposed by Jamaat-i-Islami 167 Pakistan Movement 13–26, 47, 167
organization of 4 Pakistan Muslim League 48–49, 311,
parity with Congress, call for 35 361, 362–63

Muslim Youth Organization 178 Pakistan National Alliance (PNA)
156–57

Najibullah government (Afghanistan) Pakistan National Movement 24
208–9, 213, 281 Pakistan Oppressed Nations Movement

Naoroji, Dadabhai 8 (PONM) 247, 254
Nasir, Lieutenant-General Javed 239 Pakistan People’s Party see PPP
National Awami Party (NAP) 117, partition, aftermath of

140–41, 143, 150–51, 166 atrocities and slaughter 40–41
Nawaz, General Asif colonial institution, withdrawal of

appointed COAS 222–25 39–40
sudden death 226–27 constitution making 25, 50, 54–55

Nazimuddin, Khwaja 49–50 Governor General’s office, as central
becomes Prime Minister 55 institution 51–52
Bengali language riots 50, 56–58 India and Pakistan, enmity between
cabinet dismissed by Ghulam 41–42

Mohammed 61, 66, 71 Jinnah, legacy of 50–58



380 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

Muslim League infighting 47–50 Rahman, Mujibur 78, 111, 113–14,
Objectives Resolution (1949) 52–53, 117, 137, 138, 152, 166

74, 75 Rana, Mukhtar 145, 146
political failure, and civil-military Rashidun (pious Caliphs), era of

defense of territorial integrity 205–6
70–71 Rawalpindi Conspiracy 141

princely states, sovereignty of Reagan, Ronald 181, 192, 197–98
terminated 40 Rowlatt Act (1919) 5–6

provincial leaders, mediating Rumsfeld, Donald 338
rivalries of 47–50, 52

secular goals, recession into Saadullah of Assam, Mohammad 24
background 53 Saddam Hussain 186, 216

wrenching and tragic experience Sahib, Dr Khan 48, 75
69–70 Sami-ul-Haq, Maulana 276

Pearl, Daniel, kidnap and death of SEATO (South-East Asia Treaty
326–27, 330 Organization) 73 79, 76, 136

Pethick-Lawrence, Lord 33, 35 secular state
Powell, Colin 311–12 failure of 130–31
PPP (Pakistan People’s Party) 117 struggle for 4–13

and Bhutto (B.) self-determination, age of 2, 3
defections from 237, 238 September 11
independent stance of 209–10 antecedents to 276–87
waning of 254–55 and changed perceptions of

and Bhutto (Z.A.) Pakistan x
election (1977), landslide victory impact in Pakistan 353–54

in 157 road to 301–3
formation of 110, 111 see also Afghanistan War; al-Qaeda;
fragmentation of 149–50 Taliban movement
leadership, opening of cracks in Shah, King Zahir (Afghanistan) 175,

145–47 287, 309, 312–13, 314, 342
Manifesto 112–13 Sharif, Nawaz
Rahim, J.A., dismissal of 147–48 absolute rule by 251–52
role of 135–36 background and rise of 218
as support base for leadership CDNS, controversy over 244–45

148–49 constitutional changes to acquire
ISI condemned by 343–44 greater power 244–45
see also Bhutto, Benazir; Bhutto, economic development, focus on

Zulfikar Ali 220–21
Punjab 14, 15, 115 economic disequilibrium, as legacy

atrocities in 41 of 233–34
Bhutto (B.), desire to control 211 elections, majority in 244
division of 38–39, 45 General Asif, accused of poisoning
riots, breaking out of 60 226–27

Putin, Vladimir 342 government, reinstatement of 227
Gulf War, involvement in 219–20

Qadir, Manzur 94, 96, 97 and Ishaq, duel for supremacy
Quadir, General 351 226–27
Qureshi, Moen 227–28 Islamic renaissance, supporter of
Qutb, Sayyid 177 218–19

Islamic ummah, manifestation of as
Rabbani, Burhanuddin 179–80, 224, cause and goal 252–53

225 Kargil operation, Kashmir 255–57,
Radcliffe, Sir Cyril 39, 51 266
Rahim, J.A. 111, 121, 145, 147–48 law and order issues 221–22
Rahman, Maulana Fazlur 270–71, 276, Musharraf’s coup, and removal of

343, 352–53, 353–53 255–57, 266



Index 381

nepotism and corruption hallmarks ISI/al-Qaeda/Taliban links ix–x, 246,
of 222, 249 264, 271, 284, 285–86,

nuclear capability, demonstration of 290–91, 303–4
219, 250–51 ISI and formation of 283

Pakistan and Afghanistan, Islamic Islam, violent imposition of 290–91
state objectives of 247–48 membership of 245

religious minorities, persecution of Mullah Mohammad Omar, leader of
248 245

resignation of 227 Osama bin Laden recruited for 246
Shariat law, implementation of 221 Red Army, role of ix
Sindh, takeover of 254 and re-engineering of society 288–90
strengthening of powers of, and rule, end of 316

elevation of Shari’a 246–47, Saudi-Arabian support for 245, 246
253 and Six-Plus-Two Conference 287

sworn in as Prime Minister 218 and struggle for Kabul 283–84
US, distancing from 219 sustained support for 271–72,
see also Bhutto, Benazir 291–92

Shastri, Lal Bahadur 102, 103, 108–10 Talibanization of Pakistan 247,
Sheikh, Ahmad Omar Saeed 327, 330 270–71
Sheikh, Brigadier Mukhtar 344 US intentions to destroy 307–8
Shekhar, Chandra 220 see also al-Qaeda; bin Laden, Osama
Sikhs Taraki, Mohammad 178, 179

claim for Khalistan as homeland 38 Tarar, Rafiq 249, 266, 276
Cripps proposal, opposition to 29 Tehrik-e-Insaaf 240
Muslim–Sikh conflict, resolution of Tenet, George 331

15–17 terrorism
Punjab, atrocities post-partitioning Afghanistan, Pakistan’s continuing

41 strategic role in 317
separatist violence 186, 198–99 as ancient phenomenon of

Simla conferences 32–33, 34 subcontinent 262–63
Simon, Sir John 11 Indian parliament, terrorist attack
Sindh province 14, 17, 45, 48, 115, on 318–19

213, 254 Pakistan complicity in 235, 292
South Asian Association for Regional war on (Musharraf)

Cooperation (SAARC) 220 Afghan Shura, convening of
Soviet Union 223 312–13

see also Afghanistan War Army, reshuffling of 310–11
Suhrawardy, H.S. 49–50, 62–63, ASEAN attack on terrorism in

71–72, 76, 77, 78 Kashmir 349–50
Syed, G.M. 77, 139, 213 cause célebre, Americans accused

of as justification 311, 354
Taliban movement domestic violence, terrorist

Defense of Pakistan and Afghanistan complicity in 304
Council (DPAC), formation of extremism and terrorism,
313–14 declaration against 321–25

denounced by Saudis 313 fundamentalists, rounding-up of
fall of and UN/US peacekeeping 310

force 309 Gujarat, explosion of sectarian
fundamentalism of favored by US violence in 328–29

284–85 intelligence services, reorientation
implications of severing of ties with of 312

317–18 interim Afghan government,
as instrument for Pakistani control attempts to assemble 314–15

284 ISI, de-Talibanization of 309–10
as instrument of Islamic renaissance Islamic martyrs, threat from

284, 286–87 327–28



382 Pakistan: At the Crosscurrent of History

law enforcement, difficulty of cyclone catastrophe 118–19
329–31 first National Elections

sectarian violence, explosion of Bengali uprising following
328–30 120–23

September 11, impact of 353–54 boycotted by NAP 119
Special Investigation Group election forecasts 116–17

(SIG), formation of 351 PPP seats won in 119
taken advantage of by India One Unit, breaking up of 115, 116–17

339–40 political agenda 115
terrorist activities 310, 329, see also Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali

337–39, 341–42, 350, 351–52,
368 Zahir Shah, King (of Afghanistan) 175

US, alliance with 271, 305–7, Zardari, Asif 215, 238, 241
311–12, 331–32, 352–53, 361 Zhou Enlai 101

Washington-Islamabad Zia ul-Haq, General Mohammad
cooperation 338–39 182–98

see also Taliban movement Afghanistan War 186, 192–93,
theocracy, inappropriateness of 315–16 200–202
Tikka, General see Khan, General American assistance program,

Tikka revival of 192–93
Tilak, B.J. 8 appointed as leader of Pakistan army
Tiwana, Malik Khizar Hayat Khan 33, 153–54

48 armed forces, given stake in
country’s governance 173

ul-Huq, Mohammad Zia see Zia, army discipline, re-establishment of
General 164

Unionist Party 13, 14, 48 Bhutto (Z.A.), hanging of 168, 169
United Democratic Front 151, 156 conservative lifestyle and Islamic

practice of 168–69
Vajpayee, Atal Behari 269, 342 East Pakistan civil war 174
Vendrell, Fransesc 307 executive powers, arbitrary nature of

190
Wajid, Hasina 271 FSF, destruction of 167–68
Wavell, Lord 36 India, threat from 175, 195–96
Wavell Plan 32–34 Iran, revolution in 176–77, 181, 201
World Trade Center attacks see Iran-Iraq war 186–87, 193, 201

September 11 ISI, clandestine activities of 195,
World War II 196–97, 279

and China-Burma-India counter- Junejo, dismissal of 199–200
offensive 30 Kashmir dispute

and Congress anti-war program 27 and India-Pakistan tensions
and Japanese advances into South 173–74, 186

Asia 26–27 Siachen episode 195–96
Jinnah and Muslim League support killed by bomb on board aircraft

for 27–28 202, 204
local councils, importance of 184

Yahya Khan, General Aga Mohammad martial law 164, 191
Awami League military service, and religious

demands of 117–18 commitment 164–67
not permitted to form Movement for the Restoriation of

government 119–23, 135, 299 Democracy (MRD),
background 114–15 suppression of 183
Basic Democracies system, scrapping Muslim Family Laws, opposition to

of 116 202
Bengali people, military attack on Nizam-i-Mustapha, formation of

122–23 165, 171–72



Index 383

nuclear program, advancement of sectarian strife 199–200
197–98 Sikh separatist violence 186, 198–99

Pagaro Muslim League, association terrorist attacks 193–94
with 191–92 traditional politics, abandonment of

plots against 189 170–71
political parties wafaqi mohtasib (ombudsman),

plan to reinstate 187–89 establishment of 187
rejection of 172–73, 182–83 zakat, implementation of 171, 185
sanctioning of 191–92 see also Bhutto, Benazir; Islamization

Provisional Constitution Order program
(1981), and strengthening of Ziauddin, General 256, 257
executive rule 171 Al-Zulfikar 189

Saudi-Arabia, assistance from 180,
181